Printing, in the only sense with which we are at present concerned, differs from most if not from all the arts and crafts represented in the Exhibition
in being comparatively modern.
For although the Chinese took impressions from wood blocks engraved in relief for centuries before the woodcutters of the Netherlands, by a similar process
produced the block books, which were the immediate predecessors of the true printed book,
the invention of movable metal letters in the middle of the fifteenth century may justly be considered as the invention of the art of printing.
And it is worth mention in passing that, as an example of fine typography,
the earliest book printed with movable types, the Gutenberg, or "forty-two line Bible" of about 1455,
has never been surpassed.
Printing, then, for our purpose, may be considered as the art of making books by means of movable types.
Now, as all books not primarily intended as picture-books consist principally of types composed to form letterpress,
it is of the first importance that the letter used should be fine in form;
especially as no more time is occupied, or cost incurred, in casting, setting, or printing beautiful letters
than in the same operations with ugly ones.
And it was a matter of course that in the Middle Ages, when the craftsmen took care that beautiful form should always be a part of their productions whatever they were,
the forms of printed letters should be beautiful, and that their arrangement on the page should be reasonable and a help to the shapeliness of the letters themselves.
The Middle Ages brought calligraphy to perfection, and it was natural therefore
that the forms of printed letters should follow more or less closely those of the written character, and they followed them very closely.
The first books were printed in black letter, i.e. the letter which was a Gothic development of the ancient Roman character,
and which developed more completely and satisfactorily on the side of the "lower-case" than the capital letters;
the "lower-case" being in fact invented in the early Middle Ages.
The earliest book printed with movable type, the aforesaid Gutenberg Bible, is printed in letters which are an exact imitation
of the more formal ecclesiastical writing which obtained at that time; this has since been called "missal type,"
and was in fact the kind of letter used in the many splendid missals, psalters, etc., produced by printing in the fifteenth century.
But the first Bible actually dated (which also was printed at Maintz by Peter Schoeffer in the year 1462)
imitates a much freer hand, simpler, rounder, and less spiky, and therefore far pleasanter and easier to read.
On the whole the type of this book may be considered the ne-plus-ultra of Gothic type,
especially as regards the lower-case letters; and type very similar was used during the next fifteen or twenty years not only by Schoeffer,
But though on the whole, except in Italy, Gothic letter was most often used
a very few years saw the birth of Roman character not only in Italy, but in Germany and France.
In 1465 Sweynheim and Pannartz began printing in the monastery of Subiaco near Rome,
and used an exceedingly beautiful type, which is indeed to look at a transition between Gothic and Roman,
but which must certainly have come from the study of the twelfth or even the eleventh century MSS.
They printed very few books in this type, three only; but in their very first books in Rome, beginning with the year 1468,
they discarded this for a more completely Roman and far less beautiful letter.
But about the same year Mentelin at Strasburg began to print in a type which is distinctly Roman;
and the next year Gunther Zeiner at Augsburg followed suit;
while in 1470 at Paris Udalric Gering and his associates turned out the first books printed in France, also in Roman character.
The Roman type of all these printers is similar in character,
and is very simple and legible, and unaffectedly designed for use; but it is by no means without beauty.
It must be said that it is in no way like the transition type of Subiaco,
and though more Roman than that, yet scarcely more like the complete Roman type of the earliest printers of Rome.
A further development of the Roman letter took place at Venice.
John of Spires and his brother Vindelin, followed by Nicholas Jenson, began to print in that city,
1469, 1470;
their type is on the lines of the German and French rather than of the Roman printers.
Of Jenson it must be said that he carried the development of Roman type as far as it can go:
his letter is admirably clear and regular, but at least as beautiful as any other Roman type.
After his death in the "fourteen eighties," or at least by 1490, printing in Venice had declined very much;
and though the famous family of Aldus restored its technical excellence, rejecting battered letters,
and paying great attention to the "press work" or actual process of printing,
yet their type is artistically on a much lower level than Jenson's, and in fact
they must be considered to have ended the age of fine printing in Italy.
Jenson, however, had many contemporaries who used beautiful type,
some of which -- as, e.g., that of Jacobus Rubeus or Jacques le Rouge -- is scarcely distinguishable from his.
It was these great Venetian printers, together with their brethren of Rome, Milan,
Parma, and one or two other cities, who produced the splendid editions of the Classics, which are one of the great glories of the printer's art,
and are worthy representatives of the eager enthusiasm for the revived learning of that epoch. By far,
the greater part of these Italian printers, it should be mentioned, were Germans or Frenchmen, working under the influence of Italian opinion and aims.
It must be understood that through the whole of the fifteenth and the first quarter of the sixteenth centuries
the Roman letter was used side by side with the Gothic.
Even in Italy most of the theological and law books were printed in Gothic letter,
which was generally more formally Gothic than the printing of the German workmen,
many of whose types, indeed, like that of the Subiaco works, are of a transitional character.
This was notably the case with the early works printed at Ulm, and in a somewhat lesser degree at Augsburg.
In fact Gunther Zeiner's first type (afterwards used by Schussler) is remarkably like the type of the before-mentioned Subiaco books.
In the Low Countries and Cologne, which were very fertile of printed books, Gothic was the favorite.
This type was introduced into England by Wynkyn de Worde, Caxton's successor,
and was used there with very little variation all through the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and indeed into the eighteenth.
Most of Caxton's own types are of an earlier character, though they also much resemble Flemish or Cologne letter.
After the end of the fifteenth century the degradation of printing, especially in Germany and Italy,
went on apace; and by the end of the sixteenth century there was no really beautiful printing done:
the best, mostly French or Low-Country, was neat and clear, but without any distinction;
the worst, which perhaps was the English, was a terrible falling-off from the work of the earlier presses;
and things got worse and worse through the whole of the seventeenth century, so that in the eighteenth printing was very miserably performed.
In England about this time, an attempt was made (notably by Caslon, who started business in London as a type-founder in 1720)
to improve the letter in form.
Caslon's type is clear and neat, and fairly well designed;
he seems to have taken the letter of the Elzevirs of the seventeenth century for his model:
type cast from his matrices is still in everyday use.
In spite, however, of his praiseworthy efforts, printing had still one last degradation to undergo.
The seventeenth century founts were bad rather negatively than positively.
But for the beauty of the earlier work they might have seemed tolerable.
It was reserved for the founders of the later eighteenth century to produce letters which are positively ugly, and which, it may be added,
are dazzling and unpleasant to the eye owing to the clumsy thickening and vulgar thinning of the lines:
for the seventeenth-century letters are at least pure and simple in line. The Italian, Bodoni, and the Frenchman, Didot,
were the leaders in this luckless change, though our own Baskerville, who was at work some years before them, went much on the same lines;
but his letters, though uninteresting and poor, are not nearly so gross and vulgar as those of either the Italian or the Frenchman.
With this change the art of printing touched bottom,
so far as fine printing is concerned, though paper did not get to its worst till about 1840.
The Chiswick press in 1844 revived Caslon's founts, printing for Messrs. Longman the Diary of Lady Willoughby.
This experiment was so far successful that about 1850 Messrs. Miller and Richard of Edinburgh
were induced to cut punches for a series of "old style" letters.
These and similar founts, cast by the above firm and others,
have now come into general use and are obviously a great improvement on the ordinary "modern style" in use in England, which is in fact the Bodoni type
a little reduced in ugliness. The design of the letters of this modern "old style" leaves a good deal to be desired,
and the whole effect is a little too gray, owing to the thinness of the letters.
It must be remembered, however, that most modern printing is done by machinery on soft paper, and not by the hand press,
and these somewhat wiry letters are suitable for the machine process, which would not do justice to letters of more generous design.
It is discouraging to note that the improvement of the last fifty years is almost wholly confined to Great Britain.
Here and there a book is printed in France or Germany with some pretension to good taste,
but the general revival of the old forms has made no way in those countries.
Italy is contentedly stagnant.
America has produced a good many showy books, the typography, paper, and illustrations of which are, however, all wrong,
oddity rather than rational beauty and meaning being apparently the thing sought for both in the letters and the illustrations.
To say a few words on the principles of design in typography:
it is obvious that legibility is the first thing to be aimed at in the forms of the letters;
this is best furthered by the avoidance of irrational swellings and spiky projections, and by the using of careful purity of line.
Even the Caslon type when enlarged shows great shortcomings in this respect:
the ends of many of the letters such as the t and e are hooked up in a vulgar and meaningless way,
instead of ending in the sharp and clear stroke of Jenson's letters;
there is a grossness in the upper finishings of letters like the c, the a, and so on,
an ugly pear-shaped swelling defacing the form of the letter:
in short, it happens to this craft, as to others, that the utilitarian practice, though it professes to avoid ornament,
still clings to a foolish, because misunderstood conventionality, deduced from what was once ornament, and is by no means useful;
which title can only be claimed by artistic practice, whether the art in it be conscious or unconscious.
In no characters is the contrast between the ugly and vulgar illegibility of the modern type
and the elegance and legibility of the ancient more striking than in the Arabic numerals.
In the old print each figure has its definite individuality, and one cannot be mistaken for the other;
in reading the modern figures the eyes must be strained before the reader can have any reasonable assurance
that he has a 5, an 8, or a 3 before him, unless the press work is of the best:
this is awkward if you have to read Bradshaw's Guide in a hurry.
One of the differences between the fine type and the utilitarian must probably be put down to a misapprehension of a commercial necessity:
this is the narrowing of the modern letters.
Most of Jenson's letters are designed within a square,
the modern letters are narrowed by a third or thereabout; but while this gain of space very much hampers the possibility of beauty of design,
it is not a real gain, for the modern printer throws the gain away by putting inordinately wide spaces between his lines, which, probably,
the lateral compression of his letters renders necessary.
Commercialism again compels the use of type too small in size to be comfortable reading:
the size known as "Long primer" ought to be the smallest size used in a book meant to be read.
Here, again, if the practice of "leading" were retrenched larger type could be used without enhancing the price of a book.
One very important matter in "setting up" for fine printing is the "spacing," that is, the lateral distance of words from one another.
In good printing the spaces between the words should be as near as possible equal
it is impossible that they should be quite equal except in lines of poetry
modern printers understand this, but it is only practiced in the very best establishments.
But another point which they should attend to they almost always disregard;
this is the tendency to the formation of ugly meandering white lines or "rivers" in the page
a blemish which can be nearly, though not wholly, avoided by care and forethought
the desirable thing being "the breaking of the line" as in bonding masonry or brickwork
The general solidity of a page is much to be sought for
modern printers generally overdo the "whites" in the spacing, a defect probably forced on them by the characterless quality of the letters.
For where these are boldly and carefully designed, and each letter is thoroughly individual in form,
the words may be set much closer together, without loss of clearness.
No definite rules, however, except the avoidance of "rivers" and excess of white, can be given for the spacing,
which requires the constant exercise of judgment and taste on the part of the printer.
The position of the page on the paper should be considered if the book is to have a satisfactory look.
Here once more the almost invariable modern practice is in opposition to a natural sense of proportion.
From the time when books first took their present shape till the end of the sixteenth century, or indeed later,
the page so lay on the paper that there was more space allowed to the bottom and fore margin than to the top and back of the paper,
the unit of the book being looked on as the two pages forming an opening.
The modern printer, in the teeth of the evidence given by his own eyes, considers the single page as the unit, and prints the page in the middle of his paper
only nominally so, however, in many cases, since when he uses a headline he counts that in,
the result as measured by the eye being that the lower margin is less than the top one, and that the whole opening has an upside-down look vertically
and that laterally the page looks as if it were being driven off the paper.
The paper on which the printing is to be done is a necessary part of our subject:
of this it may be said that though there is some good paper made now,
it is never used except for very expensive books, although it would not materially increase the cost in all but the very cheapest.
The paper that is used for ordinary books is exceedingly bad even in this country, but is beaten in the race for vileness
by that made in America, which is the worst conceivable.
There seems to be no reason why ordinary paper should not be better made,
even allowing the necessity for a very low price; but any improvement must be based on showing openly that the cheap article is cheap,
e.g. the cheap paper should not sacrifice toughness and durability to a smooth and white surface,
which should be indications of a delicacy of material and manufacture which would of necessity increase its cost.
One fruitful source of badness in paper
is the habit that publishers have of eking out a thin volume by printing it on thick paper almost of the substance of cardboard,
a device which deceives nobody, and makes a book very unpleasant to read.
On the whole, a small book should be printed on paper which is as thin as may be without being transparent.
The paper used for printing the small highly ornamented French service-books about the beginning of the sixteenth century is a model in this respect,
being thin, tough, and opaque.
However, the fact must not be blinked that machine-made paper cannot in the nature of things be made of so good a texture as that made by hand.
The ornamentation of printed books is too wide a subject to be dealt with fully here; but one thing must be said on it.
The essential point to be remembered is that the ornament, whatever it is, whether picture or pattern-work, should form part of the page,
should be a part of the whole scheme of the book.
Simple as this proposition is, it is necessary to be stated,
because the modern practice is to disregard the relation between the printing and the ornament altogether,
so that if the two are helpful to one another it is a mere matter of accident.
The due relation of letter to pictures and other ornament was thoroughly understood by the old printers; so that
even when the woodcuts are very rude indeed,
the proportions of the page still give pleasure by the sense of richness that the cuts and letter together convey.
When, as is most often the case, there is actual beauty in the cuts,
the books so ornamented are amongst the most delightful works of art that have ever been produced.
Therefore, granted well-designed type, due spacing of the lines and words, and proper position of the page on the paper,
all books might be at least comely and well-looking: and if to these good qualities were added really beautiful ornament and pictures,
printed books might once again illustrate to the full
the position of our Society that a work of utility might be also a work of art, if we cared to make it so.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 4: Newgate down to 1818.
Under the conditions referred to in the previous chapter,
with criminals and misdemeanants of all shades crowding perpetually into its narrow limits, the latter state of Newgate was worse than the first.
The new jail fell as far short of the demands made on it as did the old.
The prison population fluctuated a great deal,
but it was almost always in excess of the accommodation available, and there were times when the place was full to overflowing.
Neild gives some figures which well illustrate this.
On the 14th June, 1800, there were 199 debtors and 289 felons in the prison.
On the 27th April, in the following year,
these numbers had risen to 275 and 375 respectively, or 650 in all.
For two more years these high figures were steadily maintained, and in 1803 the total rose to 710.
After that they fell as steadily,
till, 1808, the lowest point was touched of 197 debtors and 182 felons, or 379 in all.
The numbers soon increased, however, and by 1811 had again risen to 629; and Mr. Neild was told that there had been at one time
300 debtors and 900 criminals in Newgate, or twelve hundred prisoners in all.
Previous to that date there had been 700 or 800 frequently, and once, in Mr. Akerman's time, one thousand.
Trustworthy evidence is forthcoming to the effect that these high figures were constantly maintained for many months at a time.
The inadequacy of the jail was noticed and reported upon again and again by the grand juries of the city of London,
who seldom let a session go by without visiting Newgate.
In 1813
the grand jury made a special presentment to the Court of Common Council, pointing out that on the debtors' side, which was intended for only 100,
no less than 340 were crowded, to the great inconvenience and danger of the inmates.
On the female side matters were much worse;
Quote. the apartments set apart for them, being built to accommodate 60 persons, now contain about 120. End quote.
Returns laid before the House of Commons showed that 6439 persons had been committed to Newgate
in the three years between 1813 and 1816,
and this number did not include the debtors, a numerous class, who were still committed to Newgate pending the completion of the White Cross Street prison.
In order to realize the evils entailed by incarceration in Newgate in these days, it is necessary to give some account of its interior
as it was occupied and appropriated in 1810.
Full details of the arrangements are to be found in Mr. Neild's "State of Prisons in England, Scotland, and Wales," published in 1812.
The jail at that date was divided into eight separate and more or less distinct departments, each of which had its own wards and yard.
These were: 1. The male debtors' side.
2. The female debtors' side. 3. The chapel yard. 4. The middle yard.
5. The master felons' side. 6. The female felons' side. 7. The state side.
8. The press yard.
1. The male debtors' side consisted of a yard forty-nine feet by thirty-one,
leading to thirteen wards on various floors, and a day room.
Of these wards, three were appropriated to the "cabin side," so called because
they each contained four small rooms or "cabins" seven feet square,
intended to accommodate a couple of prisoners apiece, but often much more crowded.
Two other wards were appropriated to the master's side debtors; they were each twenty-three feet by fourteen and a half,
and supposed to accommodate twenty persons. The eight remaining wards were for the common side debtors,
long narrow rooms -- one thirty-six feet, six twenty-three feet, and the eighth eighteen,
the whole about fifteen feet wide.
The various wards were all about eleven feet in height,
and were occupied as a rule by ten to fifteen people when the prison was not crowded, but double the number was occasionally placed in them.
The day room was fitted with benches and settles after the manner of the tap in a public-house.
2. The female debtors' side consisted of a court-yard forty-nine by sixteen feet,
leading to two wards, one of which was thirty-six feet by fifteen,
and the other eighteen by fifteen; and they nominally held twenty-two persons.
A high wall fifteen feet in height divided the females' court-yard from the men's.
3. The chapel yard was about forty-three feet by twenty-five.
It had been for some time devoted principally to felons of the worst types,
those who were the oldest offenders, sentenced to transportation, and who had narrowly escaped the penalty of death.
This arrangement was, however, modified after 1811, and the chapel yard was allotted to misdemeanants and prisoners awaiting trial.
The wards in this part were five in number, all in dimensions twenty feet by fifteen, with a sixth ward fifteen feet square.
These wards were all fitted with barrack-beds, but no bedding was supplied.
The chapel yard led to the chapel, and on the staircase were two rooms frequently set apart for the king's witnesses,
those who had turned king's evidence, whose safety might have been imperiled had they been lodged with the men against whom they had informed.
But these king's witnesses were also put at times into the press yard among the capital convicts, seemingly a very dangerous proceeding,
or they lodged with the gatesmen, the prisoner officers who had charge of the inner gates.
The middle yard was at first given up to the least heinous offenders. After 1812 it changed functions with the chapel yard.
It was fifty feet by twenty-five, and had five wards each thirty-eight by fifteen. At one end of the yard was an arcade,
directly under the chapel, in which there were three cells, used either for the confinement of disorderly and refractory prisoners,
or female convicts ordered for execution.
The master felons' side consisted of a yard the same size as the preceding, appropriated nominally to the most decent and better-behaved prisoners,
but really kept for the few who had funds sufficient to gain them admission to these more comfortable quarters.
Here were also lodged the gatesmen, the prisoners who had charge of the inner gates, and who were entrusted with the duty of escorting visitors from the gates
to the various wards their friends occupied.
The state side was the part stolen from the female felons' side.
It was large and comparatively commodious, being maintained on a better footing than any other part of the prison.
The inmates were privileged, either by antecedents or the fortunate possession of sufficient funds to pay the charges of the place.
Neild takes it for granted that the former rather than the latter prevailed in the selection,
and tells us that in the state side, quote, such prisoners were safely associated whose manners and conduct evince a more liberal style of education,
and who are therefore lodged apart from all other districts of the jail. End quote.
The state side contained twelve good-sized rooms,
from twenty-one by eighteen feet to fifteen feet square, which were furnished with bedsteads and bedding.
7. The press yard was that part set aside for the condemned.
Its name and its situation were the same as those of the old place of carrying out the terrible sentence inflicted on accused persons who stood mute.
The long narrow yard still remained as we saw it in Jacobite times,
and beyond it was now a day room for the capital convicts or those awaiting execution.
Beyond the press yard were three stories, condemned cells, fifteen in all, with vaulted ceilings nine feet high to the crown of the arch.
The ground floor cells were nine feet by six;
those on the first floor were rather larger on account of a set-off in the wall; and the uppermost were the largest, for the same reason.
Security was provided for in these condemned cells by lining the substantial stone walls with planks studded with broad-headed nails;
they were lighted by a double-grated window two feet nine inches by fourteen inches; and in the doors, which were four inches thick,
a circular aperture had been let in to give ventilation and secure a free current of air.
In each cell there was a barrack bedstead on the floor without bedding.
8. The female felons were deprived of part of the space which the architect had intended for them.
More than half their quadrangle had been partitioned off for another purpose,
and what remained was divided into a master's and a common side for female felons.
The two yards were adjoining, that for the common side much the largest.
There were nine wards in all on the female side, one of them in the attic,
with four casements and two fireplaces, being allotted for a female infirmary
and the rest being provided with barrack beds, and in dimensions varying from thirty feet by fifteen to fifteen feet by ten.
The eight courts above enumerated were well supplied with water;
they had dust-bins, sewers, and so forth, "properly disposed," and the city scavenger paid periodical visits to the prison.
The prisoners had few comforts, beyond the occasional use of a bath at some distance, situated in the press yard,
to which access was granted rarely and as a great favor. But they were allowed the luxury of drink -- if they could pay for it.
A recent reform had closed the tap kept by the jailer within the precincts, but
there was still a "convenient room" which served, and, quote,
near it a grating through which the debtors receive their beer from the neighboring public-houses.
The felons' side has a similar accommodation, and this mode of introducing the beverage is adopted because no publican as such
can be permitted to enter the interior of this prison. End quote. The tap-room and bar were just behind the felons' entrance lodge,
and beyond it was a room called the "wine room," because formerly used for the sale of wine, but
in which latterly a copper had been fixed for the cooking of provisions sent in by charitable persons.
Quote, On the top of the jail, continues Neild, are a watch-house and a sentry-box, where two or more guards, with dogs and firearms,
watch all night. Adjoining the felons' side lodge is the keeper's office, where the prison books are kept, and his clerk,
called the clerk of the papers, attends daily. End quote.
Having thus briefly described the plan and appropriation of the prison, I propose to deal now with the general condition of the inmates, and the manner of their life.
Of these the debtors, male and female, formed a large proportion.
The frequency and extent of processes against debtors seventy or eighty years ago will appear almost incredible
in an age when insolvent acts and bankruptcy courts do so much to relieve the impecunious,
and imprisonment for debt has almost entirely disappeared.
The number of processes against debtors annually was extraordinary.
Neild gives, on the authority of Mr. Burchell, the under sheriff of Middlesex,
a table showing the figures for the year ending Michaelmas 1802.
In that period upwards of 200,000 writs
had been issued for the arrests of debtors in the kingdom, for sums varying from fourpence to £500 and upwards.
Fifteen thousand of these were issued in Middlesex alone, which at that time was reckoned as only a fifteenth of Great Britain.
The number of arrests actually made was 114,300 for the kingdom, and 7020 for Middlesex.
Barely half of these gave bail bonds on arrests, and the remainder went to prison.
Quite half of the foregoing writs and arrests applied to sums under £30.
Neild also says that in 1793,
5719 writs and executions for debts between £10 and £20 were issued in Middlesex,
and the aggregate amount of debts sued for was £81,791.
He also makes the curious calculation that the costs of these actions if undefended
would have amounted to £68,728, and if defended,
£285,950; in other words, that to recover eighty odd thousand pounds,
three times the amount would be expended.
An elaborate machinery planned for the protection of the trader, and altogether on his side, had long existed for the recovery of debts.
Alfred the Great established the Court Baron, the Hundred Court, and the County Court, which among other matters entertained pleas for debt.
The County Court was the sheriff's, who sat there surrounded by the bishop and the magnates of the county;
but as time passed, difficulties and delays in obtaining judgment led to the removal of causes to the great Court of King's Bench,
and the disuse of the inferior courts.
So much inconvenience ensued, that in 1518 the Corporation obtained from Parliament an act empowering two aldermen
and four common councilmen to hold Courts of Requests, or Courts of Conscience, to hear and determine all causes of debt
under 40 shillings arising within the city.
These courts were extended two centuries later to several large provincial towns, and all were in full activity when Neild wrote,
and indeed supplied the bulk of the poor debtors committed to prison.
These courts were open to many and grave objections.
The commissioners who presided were, quote, little otherwise than self-elected
and when once appointed continued to serve sine die; they were generally near in rank to the parties whose causes they decided.
Often a commissioner had to leave the bench because he was himself a party to the suit that was sub judice.
The activity as well as the futility of these courts may be estimated from the statement given by Neild
that thirteen hundred and twelve debtors were committed by them to Newgate between 1797 and 1808,
and that no more than 197 creditors recovered debts and costs.
Costs were the gallons of sack to the pennyworth of debt.
Neild found at his visit to Newgate in 1810,
fourteen men and women who had lain there ten, eleven, and thirteen years for debts of a few shillings,
weighted by treble the amount of costs.
Thus, amongst others, Thomas Blackburn had been committed on October 15th for a debt of 1 shilling 5 pence.
for which the costs were 6 shillings 10 pence.
Thomas Dobson, on 22nd August, 1799, for 1 shilling, with costs of 8 shillings, 10 pence.
Other cases are recorded elsewhere, as at the Giltspur Street Compter, where in 1805 Mr. Neild found a man named William Grant
detained for 1 shilling 9 pence, with costs of 5 shillings.
and John Lancaster for 1 shilling, 8 pence, with costs of 7 shillings, 6 pence. Quote.
These surely, I thought," says Mr. Neild, "were bad enough! But it was not so. End quote.
He recites another most outrageous and extraordinary case, in which one John Bird,
a market porter, was arrested and committed at the suit of a publican
for the paltry sum of 4 pence, with costs of 7 shillings, 6 pence.
Bird was, however, discharged within three days by a subscription raised among his fellow-prisoners.
Mr. Buxton, in his "Inquiry into the System of Prison Discipline,"
The lad in question was found in Coldbath Fields prison, to which he had been sent for a month in default of paying a fine of forty shillings.
He had been in the employ of a corn-chandler at Islington, and went into London with his master's cart and horse.
There was in the City Road a temporary bar, with a collector of tolls who was sometimes on the spot and sometimes not.
The boy declared he saw no one, and accordingly passed through without paying the toll of a penny.
For this he was summoned before a magistrate, and sentenced as already stated.
The lad was proved to be of good character and the son of respectable parents.
Mr. Buxton's friends at once paid the forty shillings, and the boy was released.
The costs in heavier debts always doubled the sum; if the arrest was made in the country it trebled it.
Neild gives a list of the various items charged upon a debt of £10, which included instructions to sue,
affidavit of debt, drawing praecipe (1 pound, 5 shillings), capias, fee to officer on arrest,
affidavit of service, and many more, amounting in all to twenty-seven,
and costing 11 pounds, 15 shillings, 8 pence, within ten days.
Before dealing with the debtors in Newgate, I may refer incidentally
to those in other London prisons, for Newgate was not the only place of durance for these unfortunate people. There were also the King's Bench,
the Fleet, and the Marshalsea prisons especially devoted to them,
whilst Ludgate, the Giltspur Street, and Borough Compters also received them
the latter two being also a prison for felons and vagrants arrested within certain limits.
The King's Bench was a national prison, in which were confined all debtors arrested for debt or for contempt of the court of the King's Bench.
The population generally amounted to from five hundred to seven hundred, the accommodation being calculated for two hundred.
Every new-comer was entitled to a "chummage" ticket, but did not always get it,
being often obliged to pay a high rent for a bed at the coffee-house or in some room which was vacated by its regular occupant.
No fixed rates or rules governed the hiring out of rooms or parts of a room, and all sorts of imposition was practiced.
The best, or at least the most influential prisoners, got lodging in the State House, which contained "eight large handsome rooms."
Besides those actually resident within the walls,
another two hundred more or less took advantage of "the rules," and lived outside within a circumference of two miles and a half.
In these cases security was given for the amount of the debt,
and a heavy fee at the rate of £8 per £100, with £4 for every additional hundred.
Besides these, a number had the privilege of a "run on the key," which allowed a prisoner to go into the rules for the day.
The foregoing rentals and payments for privileges, together with fees exacted on commitment and discharge, went to the marshal or keeper of the prison,
whose net annual income thus entirely derived from the impecunious amounted to between three and four thousand pounds.
The office of marshal had been hereditary,
but in the 27th George II the right of presentation was bought by the Crown for £10,500.
The marshal was supposed to be resident either within the prison or the rules.
He seems to have felt no responsibility as to the welfare or comfort of those in charge, and out of whom he made all his money.
The prison was always in "the most filthy state imaginable."
The half or wholly starved prisoners fished for alms or food at the gratings.
When they were sick no more notice was taken of them than of a dog.
A man dying of liver complaint lay on the cold stones without a bed or food to eat.
Dissolute habits prevailed on all sides; drunkenness was universal, gambling perpetual.
The yards were taken up with rackets and five courts, and here and there were "bumble puppy grounds," a game in which the players rolled iron balls
into holes marked with numbers.
How to make most profit out of the wretched denizens of the jail was the marshal's only care. He got a rent for the coffee-house and the bake-house;
the keeper of the large tap-room called the Brace, because it was once kept by two brothers named Partridge, also paid him toll.
The sale of spirits was forbidden, but gin could always be had at the whistling shops, where it was known as Moonshine, Sky Blue,
Mexico, and was consumed at the rate of a hogshead per week.
The Fleet, which stood in Farringdon Street,
was a prison for debtors and persons committed for contempt by the courts of Chancery, Exchequer, and Common Pleas.
It was so used for the date of the abolition of the Star Chamber in the 16th Charles I.
The shameful malpractices of Bambridge,
the warden of the Fleet at the commencement of the eighteenth century, are too well known to need more than a passing reference.
A committee of the House of Commons investigated the charges against Bambridge, who was proved to have connived at the escape of some debtors,
and to have been guilty of extortion to others. One Sir William Rich, Bart., he had loaded with heavy irons
In consequence of these disclosures, both Bambridge and Huggin, his predecessor in the office, were committed to Newgate,
and many reforms instituted. But the condition of the prison and its inmates remained unsatisfactory to the last.
It contained generally from six to seven hundred inmates, while another hundred more or less resided in the rules outside.
The principle of "chummage" prevailed as in the King's Bench,
but a number of rooms, fifteen more or less, were reserved for poor debtors under the name of Bartholomew Fair.
The rentals of rooms and fees went to the warden, whose income was £2372.
The same evils of overcrowding, uncleanliness, want of medical attendance,
absence or neglect of divine service, were present as in the King's Bench, but in an exaggerated form.
The Committee on Jails reported that, quote, although the house of the warden looked into the court,
and the turnkeys slept in the prison, yet scenes of riot, drunkenness, and disorder were most prevalent, end quote.
The state of morals was disgraceful. Any woman obtained admission if sober, and if she got drunk she was not turned out.
There was no distinct place for the female debtors, who lived in the same galleries as the men.
Disturbances were frequent, owing to the riotous conduct of intoxicated women.
Twice a week there was a wine and beer club held at night, which lasted till two or three in the morning.
In the yard behind the prison
were places set apart for skittles, fives, and tennis, which strangers frequented as any other place of public amusement.
Matters were rather better at the Marshalsea.
This very ancient prison, which stood in the High Street, Southwark,
was used for debtors arrested for the lowest sums within twelve miles of the palace of Whitehall;
also for prisoners committed by the Admiralty Court.
At one time the Marshalsea was the receptacle of pirates, but none were committed to it after 1789.
The court of the Marshalsea was instituted by Charles I. in the sixth year of his reign,
to be held before the steward of the royal household, the knight marshal, and the steward of the court,
with jurisdiction to hold pleas in all actions within the prescribed limits. The court was chiefly used for the recovery of small debts under £10
but its business was much reduced by the extension of the Courts of Conscience.
The prison was a nest of abuses, like its neighbor the King's Bench
and came under the strong animadversion of the Jail Committee of 1729.
As the business of the Marshalsea Court declined, the numbers in its prison diminished.
The population, as reported by the committee in 1814, averaged about sixty,
and the prison, although wives and children resided within the walls, was not overcrowded.
Their conduct too was orderly on the whole.
Drunkenness was not common, chiefly because liquor was not to be had freely, although the tapster paid a rent of two guineas a week for permission to sell it.
The inmates, who euphemistically styled themselves "collegians,"
were governed by rules which they themselves had framed, and under which subscriptions were levied
and fines imposed for conduct disapproved of by the "college."
A court of the collegians was held every Monday to manage its affairs, at which all prisoners were required to attend.
A committee of collegians was elected to act as the executive, also a secretary or accountant to receive monies and keep books,
and a master of the ale-room, who kept this the scene of their revels clean, and saw that boiling water was provided for grog.
Bad language, quarreling, throwing water over one another was forbidden on pain of fine and being sent to Coventry;
but the prevailing moral tone may be guessed from the penalty inflicted upon persons singing obscene songs before nine p.m.
Yet the public opinion of the whole body seems to have checked dissipation.
The poorer prisoners were not in abject want, as in other prisons,
owing to many charitable gifts and bequests, which included annual donations from the Archbishop of Canterbury,
the Lord Steward of the Household, the steward and officers of the Marshalsea Court, and others.
Legacies had also been left to free a certain number of debtors, notably that of £100 per annum
left by a Mr. Henry Allnutt, who was long a prisoner in the Marshalsea, and came into a fortune while there.
His bequest, which was charged upon his manor at Goring, Oxon, and hence called the Oxford Charity,
was applied only to the release of poor debtors whom £4 each could free.
The supreme control of the Marshalsea was vested in the marshal of the royal household; but although he drew a salary of £500 a year,
he did nothing beyond visiting the prison occasionally, and left the administration to the deputy marshal.
The latter's salary, with fees, the rent of the tap and of the chandler's shop, amounted to about £600 a year.
The compters of Ludgate, Giltspur Street, and the Borough were discontinued as debtors' prisons (as was Newgate also)
on the opening of Whitecross prison for debtors in 1815.
Ludgate to the last was the debtors' prison for freemen of the city of London,
clergymen, proctors, attorneys, and persons specially selected by the Corporation.
At one time the Ludgate debtors, accompanied by the keeper,
went outside and beyond the prison to call on their creditors, and try to arrange their debts, but this practice was discontinued.
There were fifteen rooms of various sizes, and as the numbers imprisoned rarely exceeded five-and-twenty, the place was never overcrowded,
while the funds of several bequests and charities were applied in adding to the material comfort of the prisoners.
The Giltspur Street Compter received sheriffs' debtors, also felons, vagrants, and night charges.
It was generally crowded, as debtors who would have gone to the Poultry Compter were sent to Giltspur Street when the former was condemned as unfit to receive prisoners.
The demands for fees were excessive in Giltspur Street.
Those who could not pay were thrown into the wards with the night charges,
and denied admission to the "charity wards," which partook of all the benefits of bequests and donations to poor debtors.
The Borough Compter was in a disgraceful state to the last. The men's ward had an earth, or rather a mud, floor,
and was so unfit to sleep on that it had not been used for many years, so that the men and women associated together indiscriminately.
The rooms had no fireplaces, so it mattered little that no coals were allowed.
There were no beds or bedding, no straw even.
In one room Mr. Neild found a woman ill of a flux shut up with three men;
the latter raised eighteen pence among them to pay for a truss of straw for the poor woman to lie on.
Neild found the prisoners in the Borough Compter ragged, starving, and dirty.
I come now to the debtors in Newgate. The quarters they occupied were divided, as I have said, into three principal divisions
the master's side, the cabin side, and the common side. Payment of a fee of 3 shillings gained the debtor admission to the two first named;
those who could pay nothing went, as a matter of course, to the common side;
a further fee was, however, demanded from the new-comer before he was made free of either the master's or the cabin side.
This was the reprehensible claim for "garnish," which had already been abolished in all well-conducted prisons, but which still was demanded in Newgate.
Garnish on the cabin side was a guinea at entrance for coals, candles, brooms, etc., and a gallon of beer on discharge;
on the master's side it was thirteen and fourpence, and a gallon of beer on entrance, although Mr. Newman,
in his evidence in 1814, said it was more,
and gave the garnish for the common side at that sum, which is five shillings more than Mr. Neild says was extorted on the common side.
Numerous tyrannies were practiced on all who would not and could not pay the garnish.
They were made to wash and swab the ward, or they were shut out from the ward fireplace, and forbidden to pass a chalked line drawn on the floor,
and so were unable either to warm themselves or to cook their food.
Besides these fees, legitimate and illegitimate, there were others which must be paid before release.
The sheriff demanded 4 shillings, 6 pence for his liberate, the jailer 6 shillings, 10 pence more, and the turnkey 2 shillings;
and thus when the debtor's debt had been actually paid, or when he had abandoned his property to the creditors, and, almost destitute,
looked forward to his liberty, he was still delayed until he had paid a new debt arising, quote,
only out of a satisfaction of all his former debts, end quote. The fees were not always extorted, it is true;
nor was non-payment made a pretext for further imprisonment, thanks to the humanity of the jailer, or the funds provided by various charities.
There was this much honest forbearance in Newgate in these days,
that debtors who could afford the cabin and master's side were not permitted to share in the prison charities.
These were lumped together into a general fund,
and a calculation made as to the amount that might be expended per week from the whole sum, so that the latter might last out the year.
It generally ran to about six pounds per week. The money, which at one time had been distributed quarterly, and all went in drink,
was after 1807, through the exertions of the keeper of the jail, spent in the purchase of necessaries.
But this weekly pittance did not go far when the debtors' side was crowded, as it often was;
notably as when numbers filled Newgate in anticipation of Lord Redesdale's bill for insolvent debtors,
and there were as many as three hundred and fifty prisoners in at one time.
The city also allowed the poor debtors fourteen ounces of bread daily, and their share of eight stone of meat, an allowance which never varied,
issued once a week, and divided as far as it would go -- a very precarious and uncertain ration.
The bread was issued every alternate day; and while some prisoners often ate their whole allowance at once,
others who arrived just after the time of distribution were often forty-eight hours without food. The latter might also be six days without meat.
Share in the weekly allowance of meat might also be denied to debtors who had not paid "garnish," as well as in the weekly grant from the charitable fund.
Hence starvation stared many in the face, unless friends from outside came to their assistance,
or the keeper made them a special grant of 6 pence per diem out of the common stock;
or the sixpenny allowance was claimed for the creditors, which seldom happened, owing to the expense the process entailed.
The poor debtors were not supplied with beds. Those who could pay the price might hire them from each other,
or from persons who made a trade of it, or they might bring their beds with them into the prison.
Failing any of these methods, seeing that straw was forbidden for fear of fire, they had to be satisfied with a couple of the rugs provided by the city
the supply of which was, however, limited, and there were not always enough to give bedding to all. The stock was diminished by theft;
female visitors carried them out of the prisons, or the debtors destroyed them when the weather was warm,
and they were not in great demand, in order to convert them into mop-heads or cleaning-rags.
Sometimes rugs were urgently required and not forthcoming;
a severe winter set in, the new stock had not been supplied by the contractors, and the poor debtors perished of cold.
Again, there was no regular allowance of fuel. Coals were purchased out of the garnish money and the charitable fund;
so were candles, salt, pepper, mops and brooms. But the latter could have been of little service. Dirt prevailed everywhere;
indeed the place, with its oak floors caulked with pitch, and smoked ceilings,
could not be made even to look clean while there was no obligation of personal cleanliness on individuals, who often came into the prison in filthy rags.
Only now and again, in extreme cases, an unusually nasty companion was stripped, haled to the pump,
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 5: Newgate down to 1818, part 2.
The squalor and uncleanness of the debtors' side was intensified by constant overcrowding.
Prisoners were committed to it quite without reference to its capacity.
No remonstrance was attended to,
no steps taken to reduce the number of committals, and the governor was obliged to utilize the chapel as a day and night room.
Besides this, although the families of debtors were no longer permitted to live with them inside the jail,
hundreds of women and children came in every morning to spend the day there, and there was no limitation whatever to the numbers of visitors admitted to the debtors' side.
Friends arrived about nine a.m., and went out at nine p.m., when as many as two hundred visitors have been observed leaving the debtors' yards at one time.
The day passed in revelry and drunkenness. Although spirituous liquors were forbidden,
wine and beer might be had in any quantity, the only limitation being
that not more than one bottle of wine or one quart of beer could be issued at one time. No account was taken of the amount of liquors admitted in one day,
and debtors might practically have as much as they liked, if they could only pay for it.
No attempt was made to check drunkenness, beyond the penalty of shutting out friends from any ward in which a prisoner exceeded.
Quarreling among the debtors was not unfrequent. Blows were struck, and fights often ensued.
For this and other acts of misconduct there was the discipline of the refractory ward, or "strong room" on the debtors' side.
Bad cases were removed to a cell on the felons' side, and here they were locked in solitary confinement for three days at a time.
Order throughout the debtors' side was preserved
and discipline maintained by a system open to grave abuses, and which had the prescription of long usage,
and which was never wholly rooted out for many years to come.
This was the pernicious plan of governing by prisoners, or of setting a favored few in authority over the many.
The head of the debtors' prison was a prisoner called the steward, who was chosen by the whole body from six whom the keeper nominated.
This steward was practically supreme.
All the allowances of food passed through his hands; he had the control of the poor-box for chance charities,
he collected the garnish money, and distributed the weekly grant from the prison charitable fund.
In the latter duties he was, however, supervised by three auditors, freely chosen by the prisoners among themselves.
The auditors were paid a shilling each for their services each time the poor-box was opened. The steward was also remunerated for his trouble.
He had a double allowance of bread, deducted, of course, from the already too limited portion of the rest,
and no doubt made the meat also pay toll.
Under the steward there were captains of wards, chosen in the same way, and performing analogous duties.
These subordinate chiefs were also rewarded out of the scanty prison rations.
The same system was extended to the criminal side, and cases were on record of the place of wardsman being sold for considerable sums.
So valuable were they deemed, that as much as fifty guineas was offered to the keeper for the post.
Enough has been said, probably, to prove that there was room for improvement in the condition and treatment of debtors in the prisons of the city of London.
This gradually was forced upon the consciousness of the Corporation,
and about 1812 application was made to Parliament for funds to build a new debtors' prison.
Authority was given to raise money on the Orphans' Fund to the extent of £90,000.
A site was purchased between Red Lion and White Cross streets, and a new prison planned,
which would accommodate the inmates of Newgate and of the three compters, Ludgate,
Giltspur Street, and the Poultry, or about four hundred and seventy-six in all.
The evils of association for these debtors were perpetuated, although the plan provided for the separation of the various contingents committed to it.
There was no lack of air and light for the new jail, and several exercising yards.
and it was not ready to relieve Newgate till late in 1815.
The reforms which were to be attempted in that prison
more particularly as regarded the classification of prisoners, and which were dependent on the space to be gained by the removal of the debtors,
could not be carried out till then. It is to be feared that long after the opening of White Cross Street prison,
Newgate continued to be a reproach to those responsible for its management.
I pass now to the criminal side of Newgate, which consisted of the six quarters or yards already enumerated and described.
The inmates of this part, as distinguished from the debtors, were comprised in four classes:
(1) those awaiting trial;
(2) persons under sentence of imprisonment for a fixed period, or until they shall have paid certain fines;
(3) transports awaiting removal to the colonies, and (4) capital convicts, condemned to death and awaiting execution.
At one time the whole of these different categories were thrown together pell-mell, young and old, the untried with the convicted.
An imperfect attempt at classification was, however, made in 1812, and a yard was as far as possible set apart for the untried,
or class (1), with whom, under the imperious demand for accommodation, were also associated the misdemeanants, or class (2).
This was the chapel yard, with its five wards, which were calculated to hold seventy prisoners, but often held many more.
A further sub-classification was attempted by separating at night those charged with misdemeanors from those charged with felony,
but all mingled freely during the day in the yard.
The sleeping accommodation in the chapel-yard wards, and indeed throughout the prison, consisted of a barrack bed,
which was a wooden flooring on a slightly inclined plane, with a beam running across the top to serve as a pillow.
No beds were issued, only two rugs per prisoner.
When each sleeper had the full lateral space allotted to him, it amounted to one foot and a half on the barrack bed;
but when the ward was obliged to accommodate double the ordinary number, as was frequently the case,
the sleepers covered the entire floor, with the exception of a passage in the middle.
All the misdemeanants, whatever their offense, were lodged in this chapel ward.
As many various and, according to our ideas, heinous crimes came under this head,
in the then existing state of the law,
the man guilty of a common assault found himself side by side with the fraudulent, or others who had attempted abominable crimes.
In this heterogeneous society were also thrown the unfortunate journalists to whom I have already referred, and on whom imprisonment in Newgate
was frequently adjudged for so-called libels, or too out-spoken comments in print.
It was particularly recommended by the Committee on Jails in 1814
that some other and less mixed prison should be used for the confinement of persons convicted of libels. But this suggestion was ignored.
Indeed the partial classification attempted seems to have been abandoned within a year or two.
The Hon. H. G. Bennet, who visited Newgate in 1817, saw in one yard, in a total of seventy-two prisoners,
thirty-five tried and thirty-seven untried. Of the former, three were transports for life,
four for fourteen years, and three of them persons sentenced to fines or short imprisonment -- one for little more than a month.
Two of the untried were for murder, and several for house-breaking and highway robbery.
Nor were the misdemeanants and bail prisoners any longer separated from those whose crimes were of a more serious character.
Mr. Bennet refers to a gentleman confined for want of bail, who occupied a room with five others
two committed by the Bankruptcy Commissioner, one for perjury, and two transports.
Persons convicted of publishing libels were still immured in the same rooms with transports and felons.
The middle yard, as far as its limits would permit, was appropriated to felons and transports. The wards here were generally very crowded.
Each ward was calculated to hold twenty-four, allowing each individual one foot and a half;
Quote, a common-sized man, says the keeper, Mr. Newman, can turn in nineteen inches, end quote.
These twenty-four could just sleep on the barrack bed; when the number was higher, and it often rose to forty, the surplus had to sleep on the floor.
The crowding was in consequence of the delay in removing transports.
These often remained in Newgate for six months, sometimes a year, in some cases longer;
in one, for seven years -- that of a man sentenced to death, for whom great interest had been made, but whom it was not thought right to pardon.
Occasionally the transports made themselves so useful in the jail that they were passed over.
Mr. Newman admitted that he had petitioned that certain "trusty men" might be left in the jail.
Constantly associated with these convicted felons were numbers of juveniles, infants of tender years.
There were frequently in the middle yard seven or eight children, the youngest barely nine,
the oldest only twelve or thirteen, exposed to all the contaminating influences of the place.
Mr. Bennet mentions also the case of young men of better stamp, clerks in city offices, and youths of good parentage,
Quote, in this dreadful situation, end quote. who had been rescued from the hulks through the kindness and attention of the Secretary of State.
Quote, yet they had been long enough, he goes on to say, in the prison associated with the lowest and vilest criminals,
with convicts of all ages and characters, to render it next to impossible but that, with the obliteration of all sense of self-respect,
the inevitable consequence of such a situation, their morals must have been destroyed;
and though distress or the seduction of others might have led to the commission of this their first offense,
yet the society they were driven to live in, the language they daily heard, and the lessons they were taught in this academy,
must have had a tendency to turn them into the world hardened and accomplished in the ways of vice and crime. End quote.
Mr. Buxton, in the work already quoted, instances another grievous case of the horrors of indiscriminate association in Newgate.
It was that of a person, quote, who practiced in the law, and who was connected by marriage with some very respectable families.
Having been committed to Clerkenwell,
he was sent on to Newgate in a coach, handcuffed to a noted house-breaker, who was afterwards cast for death.
The first night in Newgate, and for the subsequent fortnight,
he slept in the same bed with a highwayman on one side, and a man charged with murder on the other.
Spirits were freely introduced, and although he at first abstained,
he found he must adopt the manners of his companions, or that his life would be in danger.
They viewed him with some suspicion, as one of whom they knew nothing.
He was in consequence put out of the protection of their internal law, end quote. Their code was a subject of some curiosity.
When any prisoner committed an offense against the community or against an individual, he was tried by a court in the jail.
A prisoner, generally the oldest and most dexterous thief,
was appointed judge, and a towel tied in knots was hung on each side in imitation of a wig.
The judge sat in proper form; he was punctiliously styled "my lord."
A jury having been selected and duly sworn, the culprit was then arraigned. Justice, however, was not administered with absolute integrity.
A bribe to the judge was certain to secure acquittal, and the neglect of the formality was as certainly followed by condemnation.
Various punishments were inflicted, the heaviest of which was standing in the pillory.
This was carried out by putting the criminal's head through the legs of a chair, and stretching out his arms and tying them to the legs.
The culprit was then compelled to carry the chair about with him.
But all punishments might readily be commuted into a fine to be spent in gin for judge and jury.
The prisoner mentioned above was continually persecuted by trials of this kind.
The most trifling acts were magnified into offenses.
He was charged with moving something which should not be touched, with leaving a door open, or coughing maliciously to the disturbance of his companions.
The evidence was invariably sufficient to convict, and the judge never hesitated to inflict the heaviest penalties.
The unfortunate man was compelled at length to adopt the habits of his associates;
Quote, by insensible degrees he began to lose his repugnance to their society,
caught their flash terms and sung their songs, was admitted to their revels, and acquired, in place of habits of perfect sobriety,
a taste for spirits. End quote.
His wife visited him in Newgate, and wrote a pitiable account of the state in which she found her husband.
He was an inmate of the same ward with others of the most dreadful sort, quote,
whose language and manners, whose female associates of the most abandoned description, and the scenes consequent with such lost wretches
prevented me from going inside but seldom, and I used to communicate with him through the bars from the passage. End quote.
One day he was too ill to come down and meet her.
She went up to the ward and found him lying down, quote,
pale as death, very ill, and in a dreadfully dirty state, the wretches making game of him, and enjoying my distress;
and I learned he had been up with the others the whole night.
Though they could not force him to gamble, he was compelled to drink,
and I was obliged afterwards to let him have five shillings to pay his share,
otherwise he would have been stripped of his clothes. End quote.
Felons who could pay the price were permitted, irrespective of their character or offenses,
to purchase the greater ease and comfort of the master's side.
The entrance fee was at least 13 shillings, 6 pence a head, with half-a-crown a week more for bed and bedding,
the wards being furnished with barrack bedsteads, upon which each prisoner had the regulation allowance of sleeping room
or about a foot and a half laterally. These fees were in reality a substantial contribution towards the expenses of the jail;
without them the keeper declared that he could not pay the salaries of turnkeys and servants, nor keep the prison going at all.
Besides the jail fees, there was garnish of half-a-guinea, collected by the steward,
and spent in providing coals, candles, plates, knives, and forks; while all the occupants of this part of the prison
supported themselves; they had the ration of prison bread only,
but they had no share in the prison meat or other charities, and they or their friends found them in food.
All who could scrape together the cash seem to have gladly availed themselves of the privilege of entering the master's side.
It was the only way to escape the horrors, the distress, penury, and rags of the common yards.
Idleness was not so universally the rule in this part of the jail.
Artisans and others were at liberty to work at their trades, provided they were not dangerous.
Tailoring and shoemaking was permitted, but it was deemed unsafe to allow a carpenter or blacksmith to have his tools.
All the money earned by prisoners was at their own disposal, and was spent almost habitually in drink, chambering, and wantonness.
The best accommodation the jail could offer was reserved for the prisoners on the state side,
from whom still higher fees were exacted, with the same discreditable idea of swelling the revenues of the prison.
To constitute this the aristocratic quarter, unwarrantable demands were made upon the space properly allotted to the female felons,
and no lodger was rejected, whatever his status, who offered himself and could bring grist to the mill.
The luxury of the state side was for a long time open to all who could pay
the convicted felon, the transport awaiting removal, the lunatic whose case was still undecided,
the misdemeanant tried or untried, the debtor who wished to avoid the discomfort of the crowded debtors' side, the outspoken newspaper editor,
or the daring reporter of parliamentary debates.
The better class of inmate complained bitterly of this enforced companionship with the vile,
association at one time forbidden by custom, but which greed and rapacity long made the rule.
The fee for admission to the state side, as fixed by the table of fees, was three guineas, but Mr. Newman declared that he never took more than two.
Ten and sixpence a week more was charged as rent for a single bed; where two or more slept in a bed the rent was seven shillings a week each.
Prisoners who could afford it sometimes paid for four beds, at the rate of twenty-eight shillings, and so secured the luxury of a private room.
A Mr. Lundy, charged with forgery, was thus accommodated on the state side for upwards of five years.
But the keeper protested that no single prisoner could thus monopolize space if the state side was crowded.
The keeper went still further in his efforts to make money.
He continued the ancient practice of letting out a portion of his own house, and by a poetical fiction treated it as an annex of the state side.
Mr. Davison, sent to Newgate for embezzlement, and whose case is given in the preceding chapter,
was accommodated with a room in Mr. Newman's house at the extravagant rental of thirty guineas per week;
Mr. Cobbett was also a lodger of Mr. Newman's; and so were any members of the aristocracy,
if they happened to be in funds -- among whom was the Marquis of Sligo in 1811.
The female felons' wards I shall describe at length in the next chapter,
which will deal with Mrs. Fry's philanthropic exertions at this period in this particular part of the prison.
These wards were always full to overflowing; sometimes double the number the rooms could accommodate were crowded into them.
There was a master's side for females who could pay the usual fees, but they associated with the rest in the one narrow yard common to all.
The tried and the untried, young and old, were herded together
sometimes girls of thirteen, twelve, even ten or nine years of age, were exposed to, quote,
all the contagion and profligacy which prevailed in this part of the prison, end quote.
There was no separation even for the women under sentence of death, who lived in a common and perpetually crowded ward.
Only when the order of execution came down were those about to suffer placed apart in one of the rooms in the arcade of the middle ward.
I have kept till the last that part of the prison which was usually the last resting-place of so many.
The old press yard has been fully described in a previous chapter.
The name still survived in the new press yard, which was the receptacle of the male condemned prisoners. It was generally crowded, like the rest of the prison.
Except in murder cases, where the execution was generally very promptly performed,
strange and inconceivable delay occurred in carrying out the extreme sentence.
Hence there was a terrible accumulation of prisoners in the condemned cells.
Once, during the long illness of George III., as many as one hundred were there waiting the "Report," as it was called.
At another time there were fifty, one of whom had been under sentence a couple of years.
Mr. Bennet speaks of thirty-eight capital convicts he found in the press yard in February 1817,
five of whom had been condemned the previous July, four in September, and twenty-nine in October.
This procrastination bred certain callousness.
Few realizing that the dreadful fate would overtake them, dismissed the prospect of death,
and until the day was actually fixed, spent the time in roistering, swearing, gambling, or playing at ball.
Visitors were permitted access to them without stint;
unlimited drink was not denied them provided it was obtained in regulated quantities at one time.
These capital convicts, says Mr. Bennet, quote, lessened the ennui and despair of their situation by unbecoming merriment
or sought relief in the constant application of intoxicating stimulants.
I saw Cashman a few hours before his execution, smoking and drinking with the utmost unconcern and indifference, end quote.
Those who were thus reckless reacted upon the penitent who knew their days were numbered,
and their gibes and jollity counteracted the ordinary's counsels or the independent preacher's earnest prayers.
For while Roman Catholics and Dissenters were encouraged to see ministers of their own persuasion,
a number of amateurs were ever ready to give their gratuitous ministrations to the condemned.
The prisoners in the press yard had free access during the day to the yard and large day room;
at night they were placed in the fifteen cells, two, three, or more together, according to the total number to be accommodated.
They were never left quite alone for fear of suicide, and for the same reason they were searched for weapons or poisons.
But they nevertheless frequently managed to secrete the means of making away with themselves, and accomplished their purpose.
Convicted murderers were kept continuously in the cells on bread and water,
in couples, from the time of sentence to that of execution, which was about three or four days generally,
from Friday to Monday, so as to include one Sunday, on which day there was a special service for the condemned in the prison chapel.
This latter was an ordeal which all dreaded, and many avoided by denying their faith.
The condemned occupied an open pew in the center of the chapel, hung with black; in front of them, upon a table, was a black coffin in full view.
The chapel was filled with a curious but callous congregation, who came to stare at the miserable people thus publicly exposed.
Well might Mr. Bennet write that the condition of the condemned side was the most prominent of the manifold evils in the present system of Newgate,
quote, so discreditable to the metropolis, end quote.
Yet it must have been abundantly plain to the reader that the other evils existing were great and glaring. A brief summary of them will best prove this.
The jail was neither suitable nor sufficiently large. It was not even kept weather-tight.
The roof of the female prison, says the grand jury in their presentment in 1813, let in the rain.
Supplies of common necessaries, such as have now been part of the furniture of every British jail for many years,
were meager or altogether absent.
The rations of food were notoriously inadequate, and so carelessly distributed, that many were left to starve.
So unjust and unequal was the system, that the allowance to convicted criminals was better than that of the innocent debtor,
and the general insufficiency was such
that it multiplied beyond all reason the number of visitors, many of whom came merely as the purveyors of food to their friends.
The prison allowances were eked out by the broken victuals generously given by several eating-house keepers in the city,
such as Messrs. Birch of Cornhill and Messrs. Leach and Dollimore of Ludgate Hill.
These were fetched away in a large tub on a truck by a turnkey.
Amongst the heap was often the meat that had made turtle soup, which, when heated and stirred together in a saucepan, was said to be very good eating.
The bedding was scanty; fuel and light had to be purchased out of prisoners' private means; clothing was issued but rarely,
even to prisoners almost in nakedness, and as a special charitable gift. Extortion was practiced right and left.
Garnish continued to be demanded long after it had disappeared in other and better-regulated prisons.
The fees on reception and discharge must be deemed exorbitant, when it is remembered the impoverished class who usually crowded the jail;
and they were exacted to relieve a rich corporation from paying for the maintenance of their own prison.
This imposition of fees left prisoners destitute on their discharge, without funds to support them in their first struggle to recommence life,
with ruined character, bad habits, and often bad health contracted in the jail.
A further and a more iniquitous method of extorting money
was still practiced, that of loading newly-arrived prisoners until they paid certain fees.
Ironing was still the rule, not only for the convicted, but for those charged with felonies; only the misdemeanants escaped.
At the commencement of every sessions, such of the untried as had purchased "easement" of irons were called up and re-fettered,
preparatory to their appearance in the Old Bailey. Irons were seldom removed from the convicted until discharge;
sometimes the wearer was declared medically unfit, or he obtained release by long good conduct,
or the faithful discharge of some petty office, such as gatesman or captain of a ward.
The irons weighed from three to four pounds, but heavier irons, seven or eight pounds' weight,
were imposed in case of misconduct; and when there had been an attempt at escape,
the culprit was chained down to the floor by running a chain through his irons which prevented him from climbing to the window of his cell.
Among other excuses offered for thus manacling all almost without exception, was that it was the best and safest method
of distinguishing a prisoner from a stranger and temporary visitor.
Clothes or prison uniform would not have served the purpose, for a disguise can be rapidly and secretly put on,
whereas irons cannot well be exchanged without loss of time and attracting much attention.
The unchecked admission of crowds of visitors to the felons' as well as the debtors' side was another unmixed evil.
By this means spirits, otherwise unattainable and strictly prohibited, were smuggled into the jail.
Searches were made certainly, but they were too often superficial, or they might be evaded by a trifling bribe.
Hence the frequent cases of drunkenness, of which no notice was taken, unless people grew riotous in their cups
and attracted attention by their disorderly behavior.
Another frightful consequence of this indiscriminate admission was the influx of numbers of abandoned women,
only a few of whom had the commendable prudery to pass themselves off as the wives of prisoners.
Any reputed, and indeed any real, wife might spend the night in Newgate if she would pay the shilling fee, commonly known as the "bad money,"
which might have done something towards increasing the prison receipts, had it not been appropriated by the turnkey who winked at this evasion of the rules.
Among the daily visitors were members of the criminal classes still at large,
the thieves and burglars who carried on the active business of their profession, from which their confederates were temporarily debarred.
One notorious character, while a prisoner awaiting transfer to the hulks,
kept open house, so to speak, and entertained daily within the walls a select party of the most noted thieves in London.
This delectable society enticed into their set a clerk who had been imprisoned for fraud,
and offered him half the booty if he would give full information as to the transactions and correspondence of his late employers.
Owing to the facility of intercourse between inside and outside, many crimes were doubtless hatched in Newgate.
Some of the worst and most extensive burglaries were planned there.
"I believe," says Mr. Bennet in the letter already largely quoted,
"that there is no place in the metropolis where more crimes are projected or where stolen property is more secreted than in Newgate."
These malpractices were fostered by the absence of all supervision and the generally unbroken idleness.
Although attempted partially at Bridewell, and more systematically at the new Millbank penitentiary,
but just open (1816), the regular employment of prisoners had never yet been accepted as a principle in the metropolitan prisons.
Insuperable difficulties were still supposed to stand in the way of any general employment of prisoners at their trades.
There was fear as to the unrestricted use of tools,
limits of space, the interference of the ill-disposed, who would neither work nor let others do so,
and the danger of losing material, raw or manufactured.
Many years were to elapse before these objections should be fairly met and universally overcome.
It was not strange, therefore, that the inmates of Newgate should turn their unoccupied brains and idle hands to all manner of mischief;
that when they were not carousing, plotting, or scheming,
they should gamble with dice or cards, and play at bumble puppy or some other disreputable game of chance.
The report of the Committee of the House of Commons painted so black a picture of Newgate as then conducted, that the Corporation were roused in very shame
to undertake some kind of reform.
The above-mentioned report was ordered to be printed upon the 9th May.
Upon the 29th July the same year,
the court of aldermen appointed a committee of its own body, assisted by the town clerk, Mr. Dance, city surveyor, son to the architect of Newgate,
and Mr. Addison, keeper of Newgate, to make a visitation of the jails supposed to be the best managed, including those of Petworth and Gloucester.
This committee was to compare allowances, examine rules, and certify as to the condition of prisoners;
also to make such proposals as might appear salutary, and calculated to improve Newgate and the rest of the city jails.
This committee made its report in September the following year, and an excellent report it is, so far as its recommendations are concerned.
The committee seems to have fully realized, even at this early date (1815),
many of the indispensable conditions of a model prison according to modern ideas.
It admitted the paramount necessity
for giving every prisoner a sleeping cell to himself, an amount of enlightenment which is hardly general among European nations at this
the latter end of the nineteenth century, several of which still fall far short of our English ideal,
that all prisoners should always be in separate cells by night, and those of short sentences by day.
It recommended day cells or rooms for regular labor, which should be compulsory upon all transports and prisoners sentenced to hard labor,
the work being constant and suitable, with certain hours of relaxation and for food and exercise.
The personal cleanliness of all prisoners was to be insisted upon; they should be made to wash at least once a day,
with the penalty of forfeiting the day's allowance of food, an increase of which the committee had recommended.
The provision of more baths was also suggested, and the daily sweeping out of the prison.
The clothes of prisoners arriving dirty, or in rags, should be fumigated before worn in the jail,
A laundry should be established, and a matron appointed on the female side, where all the prisoners' washing could be performed.
Proper hours for locking and unlocking prisoners should be insisted upon;
a bell should give notice thereof, and of meal-hours, working-hours, or of escapes.
The committee took upon itself to lay down stringent rules for the discipline of the prison.
The jailer should be required to visit every part and see every prisoner daily; the chaplain should perform service, visit the sick,
instruct the prisoners, quote, give spiritual advice and administer religious consolation, end quote. to all who might need them;
the surgeon should see all prisoners, whether ill or well, once a week, and take general charge of the infirmaries.
All three, governor, chaplain, and surgeon, should keep journals, which should be inspected periodically by the visiting magistrates.
It should be peremptorily forbidden to the keeper or any officer to make a pecuniary profit out of the supplies of food, fuel, or other necessaries.
No prisoner should be allowed to obtain superior accommodation on the payment of any fees. Fees indeed should be generally abolished, garnish also.
No prisoners should in future be ironed, except in cases of misconduct,
provided only that their security was not jeopardized, and dependent upon the enforcement of another new rule,
which recommended restrictions upon the number of visitors admitted.
No wine or beer should be in future admitted into or sold in the jail,
except for the use of the debtors, or as medical comforts for the infirmary.
Drunkenness, if it ever occurred, should be visited with severe punishment;
gaming of all sorts should be peremptorily forbidden under heavy pains and penalties.
The feelings of the condemned prisoners should no longer be outraged by their exposure in the chapel, and the chapel should be rearranged,
so that the various classes might be seated separately, and so as not to see each other.
It will hardly be denied that these proposals went to the root of the matter.
Had they been accepted in their entirety, little fault could in future have been found with the managers of Newgate.
In common justice to them, it must be admitted that immediate effect was given to all that could be easily carried out.
The state side ceased to exist, and the female prisoners thus regained the space of which their quadrangle had been robbed.
The privileges of the master's side also disappeared; fees were nominally abolished, and garnish was scotched, although not yet killed outright.
A certain number of bedsteads were provided, and there was a slight increase in the ration of bread.
But here the recommendations touched at once upon the delicate subject of expense, and it is clear that the committee hesitated on this score.
It made this too the excuse for begging the most important issue of the whole question.
The committee did not deny the superior advantages offered by such prisons as Gloucester and Petworth,
but it at once deprecated the idea that the city could follow the laudable example thus set in the provinces. Quote,
Were a metropolitan prison erected on the same lines, with all the space not only for air and exercise, but for day rooms and sleeping cells
End quote. it would cover some thirty acres, and cost a great deal more than the city, with the example of Whitecross Street prison before it,
could possibly afford.
The committee does not seem to have yet understood that Newgate could be only and properly replaced
by a new jail built on the outskirts, as Holloway eventually was, and permitted itself to be altogether countered
and checked in its efforts towards reform by the prohibitory costliness of the land about Newgate.
With the seeming impossibility of extending the limits of the prison as it then stood,
all chances of classification and separation vanished, and the greatest evils remained untouched.
All the committee could do in this respect was to throw the responsibility on others.
It pointed out that the Government was to blame for the overcrowding, and might diminish it if it chose.
It was very desirable that there should be a more speedy removal of transports from Newgate to the ships.
Again, there was the new Millbank penitentiary now ready for occupation.
Why not relieve Newgate by drawing more largely upon the superior accommodation which Millbank offered?
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 7: The beginnings of prison reform.
While Mrs. Fry was diligently engaged upon her self-imposed task in Newgate,
other earnest people, inspired doubtless by her noble example, were stirred up to activity in the same great work.
It began to be understood that prison reform could only be compassed by continuous and combined effort.
The pleadings, however eloquent, of a single individual were unable to more than partially remedy the widespread and colossal evils of British prisons.
Howard's energy and devotion were rewarded by lively sympathy, but the desire to improve which followed his exposures was but short-lived.
It was so powerless against the persistent neglect of those intrusted with prison management, that, five-and-twenty years later,
Mr. Neild, a second Howard,
as indefatigable and self-sacrificing, found by personal visitation that the condition of jails throughout the kingdom was,
with a few bright exceptions, still deplorable and disgraceful.
Mr. Neild was compelled to admit in 1812 that "the great reformation produced by Howard
was in several places merely temporary:
some prisons that had been ameliorated under the persuasive influence of his kind advice were relapsing into their former horrid state of privation,
filthiness, severity, or neglect; many new dungeons had aggravated the evils against which his sagacity could not but remonstrate;
the motives for a transient amendment were becoming paralyzed, and the effect had ceased with the cause."
I have shown in a previous chapter what Newgate was at this period, despite a vast expenditure and boasted efforts to introduce reforms.
Some of the county jails, and one or two borough jails, had been rebuilt,
generally through the personal activity of influential and benevolent local magnates, but the true principles of prison construction
were as yet but imperfectly understood, and such portions of the "improved" jails of that period as were still extant a few years back,
contrast ludicrously with the prison architecture based upon a century's experience of our own age.
The neglect of prison reform in those days was not to be visited upon the legislature.
The executive, although harassed by internal commotion and foreign war, was not entirely callous to the crying need for amelioration in jails.
Measures remedial, although at best partial and incomplete, were introduced from time to time.
Thus in 1813 the exaction of jail fees had been forbidden by law,
and two other acts more peremptory and precise followed on the same subject in succeeding years.
In 1814 a bill was brought in to insist upon the appointment of chaplains in jails, and when this had passed into law,
it was subsequently amplified, and the rates of salaries fixed.
Various acts were also passed to consolidate and amend previous jail acts.
The erection of new prison buildings was made imperative under certain conditions and following certain rules
the principle of classification was freshly enunciated; prison regulations were framed for general observance.
But the effect of this legislation was rather weakened by the remoteness of the pressure exercised.
The onus of improvement lay upon the magistracy, the local authorities administering local funds,
and they were not threatened with any particular penalties if they evaded or ignored the new acts.
Moreover, the laws applied more particularly to county jurisdictions.
The borough jails, those in fact under corporate management, were not included in the new measures;
it was hoped that their rulers would hire accommodation in the county prisons, and that the inferior establishments would in course of time disappear.
Yet the borough jails were destined to survive many years, and to exhibit for a long time to come all the worst features of jail mismanagement.
It was in 1817 that a small band of philanthropists resolved to form themselves into an association for the improvement of prison discipline.
They were hopeless of any general reform by the action of the executive alone.
They felt that private enterprise might
with advantage step in, and by the collection and diffusion of information, and the reiteration of sound advice, greatly assist the good work.
The association was organized under the most promising auspices.
A king's son, the Duke of Gloucester, was the patron; among the vice-presidents were many great peers of the realm
several bishops, and a number of members of the House of Commons, including Mr. Manners Sutton,
Mr. Sturges Bourne, Sir James Mackintosh, Sir James Scarlett, and William Wilberforce.
An active committee was appointed, comprising many names already well known, some of them destined to become famous in the annals of philanthropy.
One of the moving spirits was the Honorable H. G. Bennet, M.P., whose vigorous protests against the lamentable condition of Newgate have already been recorded.
Mrs. Fry's brother, Mr. Samuel Hoare, Junior, was chairman of the committee, on which also served many noted members of the Society of Friends
Mr. Gurney, Mr. Fry, Messrs. Forster, and Mr. T. F. Buxton, the coadjutor of Wilberforce in the great anti-slavery struggle.
Mr. Buxton had already been associated with Mrs. Fry in the Newgate visitation, and his attention had thus been drawn to the neglected state of English prisons.
When in Belgium he had examined with great satisfaction the admirable management of the great "Maison de Force" at Ghent,
which Howard had eulogized some forty years before.
In order to give greater value to the pamphlet,
he personally visited several English jails, and pointed his observations by drawing forcible contrasts between the good and bad.
Mr. Buxton's small work on prison discipline gave a new aspect to the question he had so much at heart.
For the first time the doctrine was enunciated that prisoners had rights of their own.
The untried, and in the eyes of the law still innocent, could claim pure air, wholesome and sufficient food, and opportunities for exercise.
They had a right, Mr. Buxton affirmed, to be employed in their own crafts, provided it could be safely followed in prison.
"You have no right," he says, addressing the authorities, "to subject a prisoner to suffering from cold,
by want of bed-clothing by night or firing by day
and the reason is plain: you have taken him from his home, and have deprived him of the means of providing himself with the necessaries or comforts of life,
and therefore you are bound to furnish him with moderate indeed but suitable accommodation."
"You have for the same reason," he goes on, "no right to ruin his habits by compelling him to be idle,
his morals by compelling him to mix with a promiscuous assemblage of hardened and convicted criminals,
or his health by forcing him at night into a damp, unventilated cell, with such crowds of companions as very speedily render the air foul and putrid;
or to make him sleep in close contact with the victims of contagious and loathsome disease,
or amidst the noxious effluvia of dirt and corruption.
In short, attention to his feelings, mental and bodily, a supply of every necessary, abstraction from evil society,
the conservation of his health and industrious habits, are the clear, evident, undeniable rights of an unconvicted prisoner."
Nor even when found guilty and his liberty forfeited did his privileges cease. The law appointed a suitable punishment for the offense;
it was for those charged with the administration of the law to guard carefully against any aggravation of that punishment,
to see that "no circumstances of severity are found in his treatment which are not found in his sentence."
No judge ever condemned a man to be half-perished with cold by day, or half-suffocated with heat by night.
"Who ever heard of a criminal being sentenced to catch the rheumatism or the typhus fever?"
"Disease, cold, famine, nakedness, and contagious and polluted air are not lawful punishments in the hands of the civil magistrates;
nor has he a right to poison or starve his fellow-creatures."
"The convicted delinquent has his rights," said Mr. Buxton authoritatively.
"All measures and practices in prison which may injure him in any way are illegal,
because they are not specified in his sentence; he is therefore entitled to a wholesome atmosphere,
decent clothing and bedding, and a diet sufficient to support him."
These somewhat novel but undoubtedly indisputable propositions were backed up, not by sound arguments only, but by the letter of the law.
As Mr. Buxton pointed out, many old acts of parliament designed to protect the prisoner were still in full force.
Some might be in abeyance, but they had never been repealed, and some were quite freshly imported upon the Statute Book.
As far back as the reign of Charles II., a law was passed declaring that sufficient provision should be made for the relief and setting on work
of "poor and needy prisoners committed to the common jail for felony and other misdemeanors, who many times perish before their trial;
and the poor there living idle and unemployed become debauched, and come forth instructed in the practice of thievery and lewdness."
As a remedy, justices of the peace were empowered to provide materials for the setting of poor prisoners to work,
and to pay overseers or instructors out of the county rates.
Again, the 22 Charles II. c 20 ordered the jailer to keep felons and debtors "separate and apart from one another,
in distinct rooms, on pain of forfeiting his office and treble damages to the party aggrieved."
A much later act, the 14 George III. c. 59 (1774),
which was contemporaneous with Howard's first journeys, laid down precise rules as regards cleanliness, and the proper supply of space and air.
This act set forth that "whereas the malignant fever commonly called the jail distemper
is found to be owing to want of cleanliness and fresh air in the several jails,
the fatal consequences whereof might be prevented if the justices of the peace were duly authorized
to provide such accommodations in jails as may be necessary to answer this salutary purpose,
it is enacted that the justices shall order the walls of every room to be scraped and white-washed once every year."
Ventilators, hand and others, were to be supplied.
An infirmary, consisting of two distinct rooms, one for males and one for females, should be provided for the separate accommodation of the sick.
Warm and cold baths, or "commodious bathing tubs,"
were to be kept in every jail, and the prisoners directed to wash in them before release. These provisions were almost a dead letter.
Yet another act passed in 1791, if properly observed, should have insured proper attention to them.
By the 31 George III. c. 46, s. 5,
two or more justices were appointed visitors of prisons, and directed to visit and inspect three times every quarter.
They were to report in writing to quarter sessions as to the state of the jail, and as to all abuses which they might observe therein.
The most important jail act of that early period, however, was the 24 George III. c. 54, s. 4 (1784)
which was the first legislative attempt to compel the classification of prisoners, or their separation into classes
according to their categories or crimes.
It was made incumbent upon the justices to provide distinct places of confinement for five classes of prisoners, viz.
1. Prisoners convicted of felony. 2. Prisoners committed on a charge or suspicion of felony.
3. Prisoners guilty of misdemeanors. 4. Prisoners charged with misdemeanors. 5. Debtors.
It was further ordered that male prisoners should be kept perfectly distinct from the females.
King's evidences were also to be lodged apart.
Infirmaries separating the sexes were also to be provided, a chapel too, and warm and cold baths.
"Care also was to be taken that the prisoners shall not be kept in any apartment underground."
In an early report of the Prison Discipline Improvement Society,
published some six-and-thirty years after the promulgation of this act, the flagrant and persistent violations of it and others
which had continued through that long period, are forcibly pointed out.
In 1818, out of five hundred and eighteen prisons in the United Kingdom,
to which a total of upwards of one hundred thousand prisoners had been committed in the year, only twenty-three prisons were divided according to law;
fifty-nine had no division whatever to separate males and females; one hundred and thirty-six had only one division for the purpose;
sixty-eight had only two divisions, and so on.
In four hundred and forty-five prisons no work of any description had been introduced for the employment of prisoners;
in the balance some work was done, but with the most meager results.
The want of room was still a crying evil.
In one hundred jails,
capable of accommodating only eight thousand five hundred and forty-five persons, as many as thirteen thousand and fifty-seven were crowded.
Many of the jails were in the most deplorable condition:
incommodious, as has been stated, insecure, unhealthy, and unprovided with the printed or written regulations required by law.
To specify more particularly one or two of the worst, it may be mentioned that in the Borough Compter
the old evils of indiscriminate association still continued unchecked.
All prisoners passed their time in absolute idleness, or killed it by gambling and loose conversation.
The debtors were crowded almost inconceivably. In a space twenty feet long by six wide,
twenty men slept on eight straw beds, with sixteen rugs amongst them, and a piece of timber for a bolster.
Mr. Buxton, who found this, declared that it seemed physically impossible, but he was assured that it was true,
and that it was accomplished by "sleeping edgewise."
One poor wretch, who had slept next the wall, said he had been literally unable to move for the pressure.
"In the morning the stench and heat were so oppressive that he and every one else on waking rushed unclothed into the yard;"
and the turnkey told Mr. Buxton that the "smell on first opening the door was enough to knock down a horse.
The hospital was filled with infectious cases, and in one room, seven feet by nine, with closed windows,
where a lad lay ill with fever, three other prisoners, at first perfectly healthy, were lodged. Of course they were seized with the fever;
so that the culprit, in addition to his sentence,
had to endure by "the regulations of the city a disease very dangerous in its nature," and ran the risk of a lingering and painful death.
At Guildford prison, which Mr. Buxton also visited in 1818,
there was no infirmary, no chapel, no work, no classification.
The irons, which nearly every one wore, were remarkably heavy; those double ironed could not take off their small clothes.
No prison dress was allowed, and half the inmates were without shirts or shoes or stockings.
The diet was limited to dry bread, which was of the best certainly, and a pound and a half in weight.
Matters were on much the same footing at St. Albans.
They were far worse at Bristol,
although at Mr. Buxton's visit a new jail was in process of erection, the first step towards reform since Howard's visitation in 1774.
In 1818 the old jail was so densely packed that it was nearly impossible to pass through the yards for the throng.
One hundred and fifty were lodged in a prison just capable of holding fifty-two.
In the crowd, all of them persons who had "no other avocation or mode of livelihood but thieving," Mr. Buxton counted eleven children
children hardly old enough to be released from the nursery.
All charged with felony were in heavy irons, without distinction of age.
All were in ill health; almost all were in rags; almost all were filthy in the extreme.
The state of the prison, the desperation of the prisoners, broadly hinted in their conversation and plainly expressed in their conduct,
the uproar of oaths, complaints, and obscenity,
"the indescribable stench," presented together a concentration of the utmost misery and the utmost guilt.
It was "a scene of infernal passions and distresses," says Buxton, "which few have imagination sufficient to picture,
and of which fewer still would believe that the original is to be found in this enlightened and happy country."
There was still worse to come. Having explored the yards and adjacent day rooms, and sleeping cells, a door was unlocked,
the visitors were furnished with candles, and they descended eighteen long steps into a vault.
At the bottom was a circular space, through which ran a narrow passage, and the sides of which were fitted with barrack bedsteads.
The floor was on the level of the river, and very damp.
The smell at one o'clock of the day "was something more than can be expressed by the term disgusting."
The only ventilation of this pit, this "dark, cheerless, damp, unwholesome cavern -- a dungeon in its worst sense"
was by a kind of chimney, which the prisoners kept hermetically sealed, and which had never been opened in the memory of the turnkey.
Untried persons were often lodged in this nauseous underground den,
and sometimes slept in "the pit," loaded with heavy irons for a whole year, waiting the jail delivery.
Confinement for twelve months in the Bristol jail was counted a punishment equivalent to seven years' transportation.
In this prison there was no female infirmary.
Sick women and their children remained in the ordinary wards, and propagated disease.
No prison dress was allowed; no reception-room was provided, no soap, towels, or baths.
The bedclothes consisted only of a single "very slight" rug.
The allowance of food daily to felons was a fourpenny loaf,
a price which in those days fluctuated enormously -- as much as a hundred percent in a couple of years;
but as no similar variation occurred in the prisoner's appetite, his ration was somewhat precarious.
As for the debtors, they had no allowance whatever, and were often in imminent danger of starvation.
With all this, the inmates were crowded together at night to such a degree as to excite surprise that they should escape suffocation.
There reigned through the whole edifice a chilly, damp, unwholesome atmosphere, and the effluvia from the prisoners was so nauseous
that the chaplain found it necessary to take his place before they entered chapel, as he could not otherwise have faced the smell.
It is consoling to know that there were a few brilliant exceptions to this cruel, callous neglect.
Already, as early as 1818, a prison existed at Bury St. Edmunds which was a model for imitation to others at that time,
and which even fulfilled many of the exacting requirements of modern days.
The great principles of classification, cleanliness, and employment were closely observed.
There were eighty-four separate sleeping-cells, and unless the jail was overcrowded, every inmate passed the night alone,
and in comparative comfort, with a bed and proper bedding.
The prison stood on a dry, airy situation outside the town.
Prisoners on reception were treated as they are now-a-days -- bathed, dressed in prison clothes, and inspected by the surgeon.
No irons were worn except as a punishment.
Personal cleanliness was insisted upon, and all parts of the prison were kept scrupulously clean.
There was an infirmary, properly found and duly looked after.
No idleness was permitted among the inmates. Trades were taught, or prisoners were allowed to follow their own if suitable.
There was, besides, a mill for grinding corn, somewhat similar to a turn-spit, which prisoners turned by walking in rows.
This made exertion compulsory, and imposed hard labor as a proper punishment.
Another jail, that of Ilchester, was also worthy of all commendation. It exhibited all the good points of that at Bury.
At Ilchester the rule of employment had been carried further.
A system not adopted generally till nearly half a century later had already prevailed at Ilchester.
The new jail had been in a great measure constructed by the prisoners themselves.
Masons, bricklayers, carpenters, painters had been employed upon the buildings, and the work was pronounced excellent by competent judges.
Industrial labor had also been introduced with satisfactory results.
Blanket weaving and cloth spinning was carried on prosperously,
and all the material for prisoners' apparel was manufactured in the jail.
There were work-rooms for wool-washing, dyeing, carding, and spinning.
The looms were constantly busy. Tailors were always at work, and every article of clothing and bedding was made up within the walls.
There was a prison laundry too, where all the prisoners' linen was regularly washed.
The moral welfare of the inmates was as closely looked after as the physical.
There was an attentive chaplain, a schoolmaster, and regular religious and other instruction.
Compared with those highly meritorious institutions Newgate still showed but badly.
Its evils were inherent and irremediable, but some ameliorating measures had been introduced,
mainly through the exertions of a new governor, Mr. Brown, who succeeded Mr. Newman at Newgate in 1817.
The most noticeable of the improvements introduced was a better regulation of dietaries within the prison.
The old haphazard system, by which meat was issued in bulk,
a week's allowance at a time, was abolished, and there was a regular scale of daily rations adopted.
The diet was now ample. It consisted of a pound and a half of bread per diem;
for breakfast a pint of gruel; for dinner half a pound of boiled meat, or a quart of soup with vegetables, on alternate days.
The food was properly prepared in the prison kitchen.
Meat was no longer issued raw, to be imperfectly cooked before a ward fire and bolted gluttonously, the whole two pounds at one sitting.
Mr. Brown confidently asserted that no jail in England now fed its inmates so well as did Newgate.
So plentiful was this dietary, that although the old permission remained in force of allowing the friends of prisoners to bring them supplies from outside,
the practice was falling into abeyance, and the prisoners seldom required private assistance to eke out their meals.
It was also claimed for the more ample and more orderly distribution of victuals, that the general health of the prisoners had greatly improved.
Mr. Brown also, much to his own credit, brought about the abandonment of the practice of ironing all prisoners as a matter of course.
In 1818 prisoners awaiting trial in Newgate, were at length relieved from this illegal infliction.
Convicts were not even compelled to wear irons, providing they behaved well.
It was found that shackles might be safely dispensed with, even in the case of the most desperate characters.
This was effected by stopping the nearly indiscriminate admission of visitors, which had hitherto prevailed all over the jail.
Ironing it will be remembered, was a distinguishing badge, so that when the jail was cleared the free might be readily known from the captive, and escapes prevented.
This change led to some discontent, until it was found that the much greater boon of relief from irons accompanied it, and the reform was quietly accepted.
Indeed the best consequences followed from the removal of irons. The prisoners were much better disposed; there were no riots, and fewer disturbances.
But nothing short of radical reform and complete reconstruction could touch the deep-seated evils of association, overcrowding, and idleness.
The first still produced deplorable results -- results to be observable for many years to come.
Mr. Buxton mentions the case of a boy whose apparent innocence and artlessness had attracted his attention.
He had been committed for an offense for which he was acquitted.
He left Newgate utterly corrupted, and after lapsing into crime, soon returned with a very different character.
Other cases of moral deterioration have already been recorded.
Some attempt was made to reduce the overcrowding, on the recommendation of the House of Commons Committee of 1818, but this applied only a partial remedy.
The bulk of the prisoners were still left in idleness.
A few fortunate criminals, many of them kept back from transportation on purpose, who were skilled in trades, were employed at them.
Painters, plasterers, and carpenters were allowed to follow their handicrafts, with the reward of sixpence per diem and a double allowance of food.
They used their own tools, and this without any dangerous consequences as regards facilitating the escape of others,
thus disposing of the objection so long raised against the industrial employment of prisoners in Newgate.
But this boon of toil was denied to all but a very limited number.
As the Prison Discipline Society pertinently observed in a report dated 1820,
"It is obvious that reformation must be materially impeded, and in some cases utterly defeated, when the prisoners are defectively classed,
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 8: The beginnings of prison reform.
Newgate prisoners were the victims to another most objectionable practice which obtained all over London.
Persons committed to a metropolitan jail at that time were taken in gangs, men and women handcuffed together, or linked on to a long chain,
unless they could afford to pay for a vehicle out of their own funds.
Even then they were not certain of the favor, for I find a reference to a decent and respectable woman sent to Newgate
who handed a shilling to the escort warder to provide her with a hackney coach; but this functionary pocketed the cash, and obliged the woman to walk
chained to the rest. As the miserable crew filed through the public streets, exposed to the scornful gaze of every passenger,
they were followed by a crowd of reckless boys, who jeered at and insulted them.
Many thus led in procession were in a shocking condition of dirt and misery, frequently nearly naked, and often bearing upon them
the germs, more or less developed, of contagious disease. "Caravans," the forerunners of the prison vans,
were first made use of about 1827. That the need for prison reform was imperative may be gathered from the few out of many instances I have adduced,
yet there were those who, wedded to ancient ideas, were intolerant of change; they would not admit the existence of any evils.
One smug alderman, a member of the House of Commons, sneered at the ultra philanthropy of the champions of prison improvement.
Speaking on a debate on prison matters, he declared that
our prisoners have all that prisoners ought to have, without gentlemen think they ought to be indulged with Turkey carpets.
The Society for the Improvement of Prison Discipline was taxed with a desire to introduce a system
tending to divest punishment of its just and salutary terrors;
an imputation which the Society indignantly and very justly repudiated, the statement being, as they said,
refuted by abundant evidence, and having no foundation whatever in truth.
Among those whom the Society found arrayed against it was Sydney Smith,
who, in a caustic article contributed to the 'Edinburgh Review,' protested against the pampering of criminals
While fully admitting the good intentions of the Society, he condemned their ultra humanitarianism as misplaced.
He took exception to various of the proposals of the Society. He thought they leant too much to a system of indulgence and education in jails.
He objected to the instruction of prisoners in reading and writing.
"A poor man who is lucky enough," he said, "to have his son committed for a felony
educates him under such a system for nothing, while the virtuous simpleton who is on the other side of the wall is paying by the quarter for these attainments."
He was altogether against too liberal a diet; he disapproved of industrial occupations in jails, as not calculated to render prisons terrible.
"There should be no tea and sugar, no assemblage of female felons around the washing-tub,
nothing but beating hemp and pulling oakum and pounding bricks -- no work but what was tedious, unusual."
"In prisons, which are really meant to keep the multitude in order, and to be a terror to evil-doers, there must be no sharings of profits,
no visiting of friends, no education but religious education, no freedom of diet,
no weavers' looms or carpenters' benches. There must be a great deal of solitude, coarse food, a dress of shame,
hard, incessant, irksome, eternal labor, a planned and regulated and unrelenting exclusion of happiness and comfort.
Undeterred by these sarcasms and misrepresentations,
the Society pursued its laudable undertaking with remarkable energy and great singleness of purpose.
The objects it had in view were set forth in one of its earliest meetings.
It sought to obtain and diffuse useful information
to suggest beneficial regulations, and circulate tracts demonstrating the advantages of classification,
constant inspection, regular employment, and humane treatment generally, with religious and moral instruction.
It earnestly advocated the appointment of female officers to take exclusive charge of female prisoners,
a much-needed and, according to our ideas, indispensable reform, already initiated by the Ladies' Committee at Newgate.
It made the subject of the newly-invented tread-wheels, or stepping-wheels, as they were at first called, its peculiar affair,
and obtained full details, from places where they had been adopted, of the nature of these new machines
the method by which they were worked, and the dietaries of the prisoners employed upon them.
Nor did it confine itself to mere verbal recommendations.
The good it tried to do took active shape in the establishment of temporary refuges -- at Hoxton for males, and in the Hackney Road for females
for the reception of deserving cases discharged from prison. The governor of Newgate and other metropolitan prisons had orders of admission to this refuge
which he could bestow on prisoners on release, and so save the better-disposed or the completely destitute from lapsing at once into crime.
The refuge, which had for its object the training of its inmates in habits of industry,
and in moral and religious duty, and which after a time sought to provide them with suitable situations, was supported entirely out of the funds of the Society.
At the time of its greatest prosperity, its annual income from donations and subscriptions was about one thousand six hundred pounds.
Another point to which the Society devoted infinite pains was the preparation of plans for the guidance of architects in the construction of prisons.
A very valuable volume published by the Society
traced the progress of prison architecture from the days when the jail was the mere annexe of the baronial or episcopal castle
or a dungeon above or below the gate of a town, to the first attempts at systematic reconstruction carried out under the advice and supervision of Howard.
It is interesting to observe that the plan of "radiation," by which the prison blocks radiated from a central hall, like spokes in a wheel
was introduced as early as 1790 by Mr. Blackburn
an architect of eminence who was very largely employed in the erection of prison buildings at the close of the last century.
With some important modifications this principle of radiation is still the rule.
The Society did not limit its remarks to the description of what had already been done
but it offered suggestions for future buildings, with numerous carefully-executed drawings and designs of the model it recommended for imitation.
Experience has since shown that in some respects these plans are defective, especially in the placing of the governor's residence in the center of the prison.
It was thought that this would guarantee constant supervision and inspection, but it did nothing of the kind, and only the presence of warders on duty
is found now-a-days to be really efficacious. The main recommendations, however, are based upon common sense
and none are more commendable than that which deprecates the excessive ornamentation of the external parts of the edifice.
"The new jails," as Howard says, "having pompous fronts, appear like palaces to the lower class of people, and many persons are against them on this account."
The Prison Society reproves the misdirected efforts of ambitious architects, who by a lavish and improvident expenditure of public money
sought to "rank the prisons they built among the most splendid buildings of the city or town."
Absence of embellishment is in perfect unison with the character of the establishment.
These are principles fully recognized now-a-days, and it may fairly be conceded that the Prison Discipline Society's ideal
differed little from that kept in view in the construction of the latest and best modern jails.
After a few years of active exertion the Society was rewarded by fresh legislation.
To its efforts, and their effect upon Parliament and the public mind, we must attribute the new Jail Acts of 4 George IV
cap. 64, and 5 George IV. cap. 85
which having gone through several sessions, at last became law in 1823 to 4
By the preamble of the first-named act it was declared
"expedient to introduce such measures and arrangements as shall not only provide for the safe custody,
but shall also tend more effectually to preserve the health
and improve the morals of the prisoners, and shall insure the proper measure of punishment to convicted offenders.
Accordingly due provision was made for the enforcement of hard labor on all prisoners sentenced to it, and for the employment of all others.
unless such ability (to work) should cease by reason of sickness, infirmity, the want of sufficient work, or from any other cause.
It was distinctly laid down that male and female prisoners should be confined in separate buildings or parts of the prison,
"so as to prevent them from seeing, conversing, or holding any intercourse with each other."
Classification was insisted upon, in the manner laid down by the 24 George III. cap. 54,
with such further separation as the justices should deem conducive to good order and discipline.
Female prisoners were in all cases to be under the charge of female officers.
Every prison containing female prisoners was to have a matron who was to reside constantly in the prison.
The religious and moral welfare of the prisoners were to be attended to,
the first by daily services, the latter by the appointment of schoolmasters and instruction in reading and writing.
Last, but not least, the use of irons was strictly forbidden, "except in cases of urgent and absolute necessity,"
and every prisoner was to be provided with a hammock or cot to himself, suitable bedding, and, if possible, a separate cell.
The second act, passed in the following year, enlarged and amended the first, and at the same time gave powers to the House
to call for information as to the observance of its provisions.
The promulgation of these two Jail Acts strengthened the hands of the Prison Discipline Society enormously.
It had now a legal and authoritative standard of efficiency to apply,
and could expose all the local authorities that still lagged behind, or neglected to comply with the provisions of the new laws.
The Society did not shrink from its self-imposed duty, but continued year after year, with unflagging energy and unflinching spirit, to watch closely
and report at length upon the condition of the prisons of the country.
For this purpose it kept up an extensive correspondence with all parts of the kingdom, and circulated queries to be answered in detail,
Upon these and the private visitations made by various members the Society obtained the facts,
often highly damnatory, which were embodied in its annual reports.
The progress of improvement was certainly extremely slow.
It was long before the many jurisdictions imitated the few.
Jails, of which the old prison at Reading was a specimen, were still left intact.
In that prison, with its cells and yards arranged within the shell of an ancient abbey chapel,
or contriving some means of escape by climbing the fluted columns which supported the Gothic arches of the aisles,
and so passing by the roof down into the garden and on to freedom.
In a county prison adjoining the metropolis, the separation between the male and female quarters was supposed to be accomplished by the erection of an iron railing;
in this same prison capital convicts were chained to the floor until execution.
In another jail not far off male and female felons still occupied the same room -- underground, and reached by a ladder of ten steps.
In others the separation between the sexes consisted in a hanging curtain
or an imaginary boundary line, and nothing prevented parties from passing to either side
but an empty regulation which all so disposed could defy.
Numbers of the jails were still unprovided with chaplains, and the prisoners never heard Divine service.
In many others there were no infirmaries, no places set apart for the confinement of prisoners afflicted with dangerous and infectious disorders.
No attempt was made to maintain discipline.
Half the jails had no code of rules properly prepared and sanctioned by the judges, according to law.
By degrees, however,
the changes necessary to bring the prisons into conformity with the recent acts were attempted, if not actually introduced into the county prisons, to which,
with a few of the more important city or borough prisons, these acts more especially applied.
Most of the local authorities embarked into considerable expenditure, determined to rebuild their jails de novo on the most approved pattern,
or to reappropriate, reconstruct, and patch up the existing prisons till they were more in accordance with the growing requirements of the times.
Religious worship became more generally the rule; chaplains were appointed, and chapels provided for them; surgeons and hospitals also.
Workshops were built at many prisons, various kinds of manufactures and trades were set on foot, including weaving, matting, shoe-making, and tailoring.
The interior of one prison was illuminated throughout with gas, -- still a novelty, which had been generally adopted in London only four years previously,
"a measure which must greatly tend to discourage attempts to escape."
There were tread-wheels at most of the prisons, and regular employment thereon or at some other kind of hard labor.
In many places too where the prisoners earned money by their work, they were granted a portion of it for their own use after proper deduction for maintenance.
Only a few glaring evils still demanded a remedy.
The provision of separate sleeping cells was still quite inadequate. For instance,
in twenty-two county jails there were 1063 sleeping cells in all (in 1823)
and the average daily number committed that year amounted to 3985.
The want of sleeping cells long continued a crying need.
Four years later the Prison Society reported
that in four prisons, which at one time of the year contained 1308 prisoners, there were only sixty-eight sleeping rooms or cells,
making an average of nineteen persons occupying each room.
At the New Prison, Clerkenwell, which had become the principal reception jail of Middlesex, and so took all the untried,
the sleeping space per head was only sixteen inches, and often as many as 293 men had to be accommodated on barrack beds
occupying barely 390 feet lineal
The "scenes of tumult and obscenity" in these night rooms are said to have been beyond description; a prisoner in one nocturnal riot lost an eye.
Yet to Clerkenwell were now committed the juveniles, and all who were inexperienced in crime.
Great want of uniformity in treatment in the various prisons was still noticeable
and was indeed destined to continue for another half century, in other words, until the introduction of the Prison Act of 1877.
At the time of which I am writing there was great diversity of practice as regards the hours of labor.
In some prisons the prisoners worked seven hours a day, in others ten and ten and a half.
The nature of the employment varied greatly in severity, especially the tread-wheel labor.
In some county jails, as I have already said, female prisoners were placed upon the tread-wheel;
in others women were very properly exempted from it, and also from all severe labor.
Earnings were very differently appropriated. Here the prisoners were given the whole amount, there a half or a third.
Sometimes this money might be expended in the purchase of extra articles of food.
The rations varied considerably everywhere.
It was still limited to bread in some places, the allowance of which varied from one to three pounds;
in others meat, soup, gruel, beer were given.
Here and there food was not issued in kind, but a money allowance which the prisoner might expend himself.
Bedding and clothing was still denied, but only in a few jails;
in others both were supplied in ample quantities, the cost varying per prisoner from twenty shillings to five pounds.
It was plain that although the law had defined general principles of prison government,
too much discretion was still left to the magistracy to fill in the details. The legislature only recommended,
it did not peremptorily insist. Too often the letter of the law was observed, but not its spirit.
One great impediment to wide amelioration was that a vast number of small jails lay out of reach of the law.
When the new acts were introduced, numerous prisons under local jurisdiction were exempted from the operation of the law.
They were so radically bad that reform seemed hopeless, and it was thought wiser not to bring them under provisions which clearly could not be enforced.
Mr. Peel, who as Home Secretary had charge of the bill,
which became the 4 George IV. cap. 64, said that he had abstained from legislating for these small jurisdictions "on mature deliberation."
"It is not," he said, "that I am insensible of the lamentable and disgraceful situation in which many of them are,
but I indulge a hope that many of them will contract with the counties,
that many of them will build new jails, and that when in a year or two we come to examine their situation,
we shall find but few which have not in one or other of these ways removed the grievance of which such just complaint is made.
When that time arrives
I shall not hesitate to ask Parliament for powers to compel them to make the necessary alterations, for it is not to be endured that these local jurisdictions should remain
in the deplorable situation in which many of them now are."
At this time there were in England one hundred and seventy boroughs, cities, towns, and liberties
which possessed the right of trying criminals for various offenses.
Nearly every one of these jurisdictions had its own prison, and there were one hundred and sixty such jails in all.
Many of them consisted of one or two rooms at most.
he total number of prisoners they received during the year varied from two persons to many hundreds.
It was in these jails, withdrawn from the pressure of authority, that the new rules were invariably ignored.
The right and privilege of the borough to maintain its own place of confinement was so "ancient and indisputable,"
that for long no idea of interfering with them was entertained.
All that was urged was that the borough magistracy had no right to govern their jails
so as to corrupt those committed, "to the injury of the peace and morals of the public."
As time passed, however, these magistrates made no effort at reform.
They neither built new jails nor contracted with the counties, as had been expected, for the transfer of their prisoners.
As the Society put it in 1827, "the friends to the improvement of prison discipline will regret to learn
that the jails attached to corporate jurisdictions continue to be the fruitful sources
of vice and misery, debasing all who are confined within their walls, and disseminating through their respective communities
the knowledge and practice of every species of criminality.
The Society proceeded to support this indictment by facts. It is much the old story.
The prisoners were lodged in rooms whence they could converse with passengers in the streets, and freely obtain spirits and other prohibited articles.
All descriptions of offenders congregated together in the felons' wards.
The keeper and his officers resided at a distance from the jail, and left its inmates to their own devices.
There was no decency whatever in the internal arrangements;
still no separation of the sexes, no means of ablution or other necessary services.
One borough prison consisted of nothing more than a couple of cells, about ten yards square, and absolutely nothing more.
In another borough, with a population of ten thousand, the prison was of the same dimensions.
One cell was a dungeon, and the other an "improper and unhealthy abode for any human being," with a watercourse running through it.
Most of these small jails were still in existence and in much the same state eight years later,
as is shown by the report of the Commissioners to inquire into the state of the municipal corporations in 1835.
Thus Dinas Mwddy, in Merionethshire, had, "besides the pinfold and the stocks or crib, a little prison."
Clun, in Shropshire, had a lock-up under the town hall.
At Eye, in Suffolk, the jail was part of the poor-house; so it was at Richmond, in Yorkshire, where the master of the workhouse was also keeper of the jail.
At Godmanchester there was no jail, but a cage to secure prisoners till they could be taken before a magistrate.
Kidderminster had a prison, one damp chill room,
the only aperture through which air could be admitted being an iron grating level with the street,
through the bars of which quills or reeds were inserted, and drink conveyed to the prisoners.
At Walsall, in Staffordshire,
the jail consisted of six cells, frequently so damp that the moisture trickled down the walls; there was not space for air or exercise,
and the prison allowance was still limited to bread and water.
Newgate through all these years continued a bye-word with the Society.
Some reforms had certainly been introduced, such as the abolition of irons, already referred to, and the establishment of male and female infirmaries.
The regular daily visitation of the chaplain was also insisted upon.
But it was pointed out in 1823 that defective construction must always bar the way to any radical improvement in Newgate.
Without enlargement no material change in discipline or interior economy could possibly be introduced.
The chapel still continued incommodious and insufficient
female prisoners were still exposed to the full view of the males, the netting in front of the gallery being perfectly useless as a screen.
In 1824 Newgate had no glass in its windows, except in the infirmary and one ward of the chapel yard;
and the panes were filled in with oiled paper, an insufficient protection against the weather;
and as the window-frames would not shut tight, the prisoners complained much of the cold, especially at night.
There was a diminution in the numbers in custody, due to the adoption of the practice of not committing at once to Newgate every offender for trial at the Old Bailey
but nothing had been done to improve the prison buildings.
In 1827 the Society was compelled to report that "no material change had taken place in Newgate since the passing of the prison laws,
and that consequently the observance of their most important provisions was habitually neglected.
It was enacted that the court of aldermen should make rules for the government of the prison, and that these should be posted publicly within the walls.
As yet no rules or regulations had been printed or prepared.
By another clause of the Jail Act, two justices were to be appointed to visit the prison at least thrice in every quarter, and "oftener if occasion required."
These justices were to inspect every part of the prison, and examine into the state and condition of prisoners.
The city justices had not fulfilled this obligation.
Idleness was still the general rule for all prisoners in Newgate, in defiance of the law.
There was no instruction of adult prisoners, in accordance with the law. The sleeping accommodation was still altogether contrary to the latest ideas.
Last, and worst of all, the arrangements for keeping the condemned prisoners between sentence and execution were more than unsatisfactory.
They were not confined apart from each other, but were crowded thirty or forty together in the press yard,
so that "corrupt conversation obliterated from the mind of him who is doomed to suffer every serious feeling and valuable impression."
I shall have more to say on this subject, and upon the state of Newgate generally, in the following chapter.
The Prison Society did not relax its efforts as time passed, but its leading members had other and more pressing claims upon their energies.
Mr. Buxton had succeeded to the great work which William Wilberforce had commenced, and led the repeated attacks upon slavery in British colonies
till the whole body of the slaves were manumitted in 1833.
In the year immediately preceding this, Parliament was too busy with the great question of its own reform to spare much time for domestic legislation.
Nevertheless a committee of the House of Commons was appointed in 1831 to report upon the whole system of secondary punishments,
which dealt with jails of all classes, as well as transportation.
This committee animadverted strongly upon the system in force at the metropolitan jails, and more especially upon the condition of Newgate
where "prisoners before and after trial are under no efficient superintendence," and where "there was no restraint, or attempt at restraint."
Mr. Samuel Hoare was examined by this committee
From the moment of a person's committal he was certain to be plunged deeper and deeper in guilt.
The prisoners were crowded together in the jail, contrary to the requirements of the 4 George IV.
Again in 1835 prisons and their inmates became once more the care of the senate, and the subject was taken up this time by the House of Lords.
A committee was appointed, under the presidency of the Duke of Richmond
"to inquire into and report upon the several jails and houses of correction in the counties, cities, and corporate towns within England and Wales
upon the rules and discipline therein established with regard to the treatment of unconvicted as well as convicted persons."
The committee was also to report upon the manner in which sentences were carried out, and to recommend any alterations necessary in the rules
in order to insure uniformity of discipline. It met on the 31st March, 1835, and continued its sittings well into July
during which time a host of witnesses were examined, and the committee presented three separate reports,
embodying recommendations which may be said to have formed the basis of modern prison management.
It was laid down as a first and indispensable principle that uniformity of discipline should prevail everywhere,
a theory which did not become a practical fact for forty more years.
As a means of securing this uniformity,
it was suggested that the rules framed for prison government should be subjected to the Secretary of State for approval,
and not, as heretofore, to the judges of assize; that, both to check abuses and watch the progress of improvement,
inspectors of prisons should be appointed, who should visit all the prisons from time to time and report to the Secretary of State.
It was recommended that the dietaries should be submitted and approved like the rules; that convicted prisoners should not receive any food but the jail allowance;
that food and fuel should be issued in kind, and never provided by the prisoners themselves out of monies granted them.
The use of tobacco, hitherto pretty generally indulged in both by men and women,
should be strictly prohibited, "as a stimulating luxury inconsistent with any notion of strict discipline and the due pressure of just punishment."
Prison officers should not have any share in prisoners' earnings,
which should be paid into general prison funds, and no part of them handed over to the prisoners themselves.
As a means of increasing the severity of imprisonment, letters and visits from outside should not be permitted during the first six months of an imprisonment.
Various other recommendations were made as regards the appointment of chaplain and schoolmasters; the limitation of the powers of wardsmen,
or prisoners employed in positions of trust, who should not be permitted to traffic with their fellow-prisoners in any way.
The committee most of all insisted upon the entire individual separation of prisoners, except during the hours of labor,
religious worship, and instruction, as "absolutely necessary for preventing contamination,
and for securing a proper system of prison discipline.
This was the first enunciation of the system of separate confinement,
which was eventually to replace the attempted arrangement of prisoners by classes according to antecedents and crimes,
an incomplete and fallacious method of preventing contamination.
The Lords' Committee fully recognized the painful fact
that the greatest mischief followed from the intercourse which was still permitted in so many prisons; to use its words,
"the comparatively innocent are seduced, the unwary are entrapped,
and the tendency to crime in offenders not entirely hardened is confirmed by the language, the suggestions, and the example
of more depraved and systematic criminals.
This committee, as well as the one preceding it, also reported in terms of strong reprobation on the small prisons and jails
still under the borough corporations. The Commons' Committee gave it as their opinion that they were in a deplorable state.
The same language was used by the commissioners appointed to inquire into the municipal corporations in 1835,
when speaking more particularly of the borough jails.
In these the commissioners found "additional proof of the evils of continuing the present constitution of the local tribunals.
Instances rarely occur in which the borough jails admit of any proper classification of the prisoners.
In some large towns, as at Berwick on Tweed, Southampton, and Southwark, they (the prisons) are in a very discreditable condition.
In many of the smaller boroughs they are totally unfit for the confinement of human beings.
In these places the prisoners are often without a proper supply of air and light; frequently the jails are mere dungeons under the town hall.
It was frequently stated in evidence that the jail of the borough was in so unfit a state for the reception of prisoners,
that plaintiffs were unwilling to consign the defendants against whom they had obtained execution to confinement within its walls."
The Lords' Committee on Jails were of the same opinion, and considered the prisons under corporate or peculiar jurisdiction in a very unsatisfactory condition.
They therefore recommended that the prisoners should be removed
to the county jails from such prisons as were past improvement, and that the borough funds should be charged for the accommodation.
The whole question was again dealt with in Lord John Russell's bill for the reform of the municipal corporations, and with a more liberal election of town councilors,
and the establishment of municipal institutions upon a proper footing,
In the preceding chapter I have been tempted by the importance of the general question to give it prominence and precedence over the particular branch of which I am treating.
Newgate has remained rather in the background while the whole of the jails as a body were under discussion.
But this digression was necessary in order to present a more complete picture of the state of jails in the early part of the present century,
just before the public mind was first awakened to the need for thorough reform.
I shall now return to the great jail of the city of London, and give a more detailed account of its condition and inner life
as the inspectors of prisons found them in 1835 to 6.
These gentlemen were appointed in October 1835, owing to the strong representations of the Lords' Committee
backed up by the evidence of several influential witnesses.
Mr. Samuel Hoare, when examined, considered it indispensably necessary, to carry out whatever system might be established,
that inspectors should watch over the observance of the law. He saw no objection on the score of their probable interference with the local jurisdiction,
but he would not arm them with any authority lest their cooperation might be offensive.
Sir Frederick Roe was of the same opinion as regards the appointment, but he would give the inspectors the power of acting as well as reporting.
They should be persons, he thought, selected from the highest class; the duty was most important,
one which required discretion, judgment, and knowledge of law, with sufficient insight and experience to discover defects in prison discipline.
These considerations no doubt had weight
with those who made the selection of the first inspectors, and the two gentlemen appointed were probably the most fitted in England to be so employed.
The first named had long been an active philanthropist, devoting himself more particularly to the reformation of juvenile criminals.
William Crawford had been one of the promoters and managers of the Philanthropic Society's farm school.
Later on he had devoted himself to the personal investigation of the prisons of the United States.
At that time the mild and intelligent prison discipline in force in Pennsylvania, the legacy of the old Quaker immigrants,
had made such prisons as Auburn a model for imitation.
Several European states had dispatched emissaries to examine and report upon them.
France had sent Misseurs Beaumont and De Tocqueville, who subsequently published several interesting works on the subject.
England was represented by Mr. Crawford, and the result of his inquiry was given to the public as an appendix to the House of Commons' Report on Secondary Punishments.
It is an able and exhaustive state paper, testifying to the keenness of the writer's perception, and his unremitting labor in pursuing his researches.
Mr. Crawford was thoroughly versed in the still imperfectly understood science of prison management, and fully qualified for his new duties.
The second inspector, the Rev. Whitworth Russell, was the chaplain of Millbank penitentiary,
the great architectural experiment which grew out of the strong representations of Jeremy Bentham and others, and was the first national recognition of the principle
that punishment must be reformatory as well as deterrent.
Messrs. Crawford and Russell proceeded to carry out their new functions with commendable energy, and without a moment's loss of time.
The ink was barely dry upon their letters of appointment before they appeared at Newgate, and commenced a searching investigation.
took voluminous evidence from all classes of individuals, from the governor down to the convict in the condemned cells.
They visited the wards after locking-up time, and saw with their own eyes what went on.
"a subject of magnitude and importance sufficient to exclude other jails," they soon narrowed their inquiry still further,
and limited it to Newgate alone. Newgate indeed became the sole theme of their first report.
The fact was that the years as they passed, nearly twenty in all, had worked but little permanent improvement in this detestable prison.
Changes introduced under pressure had been only skin deep.
Relapse was rapid and inevitable, so that the latter state of the prison was worse than the first.
The disgraceful overcrowding had been partially ended, but the same evils of indiscriminate association were still present; there was the old neglect of decency,
the same callous indifference to the moral well-being of the prisoners, the same want of employment and of all disciplinary control.
All these evils were set forth at length in the inspectors' first report.
There was no longer the faintest possible excuse for overcrowding. The numbers now committed to Newgate had sensibly diminished.
The prison had become more or less a place of detention only, harboring mainly those awaiting trial.
To these were still added an average of about fifty expecting the last penalty of the law; a certain number of transports awaiting removal to the colonies;
an occasional prisoner or two committed by the Houses of Parliament, the Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas,
the Exchequer, the Commissioners of bankruptcy and of taxes; smugglers, and a larger number sentenced for very short terms,
and for offenses of the most varying description, by the Central Criminal Court.
The sum total thus produced was inconsiderable compared with the hundreds that had formerly filled the jail,
and the whole by proper management might have been so accommodated as to prevent overcrowding.
But incredible as it may appear, the authorities of Newgate declined to avail themselves of the advantages offered them,
and when the population fell they shut up one half the jail and crowded up the other.
Some rooms remained quite empty and unoccupied, while others were full to overflowing.
Not only were the wards thus needlessly crammed, and for no reason but the niggardliness of the corporation which refused a proper supply of bedding
but the occupants of each were huddled together indiscriminately. The inspectors found in the same wards in the chapel yard the convicted and the untried,
the felon and the misdemeanant, the sane and the insane, the old and young offender.
The classification prescribed by the Jail Act, which laid down that certain prisoners should not intermix, was openly neglected,
and "the greatest contempt shown for the law."
In another part there were men charged with and convicted of unnatural offenses shut up with lads of tender years;
minor offenders charged with small thefts or non-payment of small sums were cheek by jowl with convicts sentenced to long terms of transportation.
In the master's side yard, which had only one washing place, as many as seventy-eight prisoners, frequently more,
were associated together, "of every variety of age, habit, and delinquency, without employment, oversight, or control."
In the middle yard it was still worse.
"Here," say the inspectors, "are herded together the very worst class of prisoners; certainly a more wretched combination of human beings can hardly be imagined.
We have reason to fear that poverty, ragged clothes, and an inability to pay the ward dues, elsewhere exacted for better accommodation,
consign many of the more petty and unpracticed offenders to this place,
where they inevitably meet with further contamination from the society of the most abandoned and incorrigible inmates of the jail."
No doubt the governor for the time being, Mr. Cope, was in a great measure to blame for all this, and for the want of proper classification.
I shall have occasion to speak again, and more at length, of Mr. Cope's careless and perfunctory discharge
of his many manifest duties, but I shall here confine myself to animadverting on his neglect as regards the appropriation of his prison.
He was unable to give any reason whatever for not utilizing the whole of the wards.
He saw certain rooms fill up, and yet took no steps to open others that were locked up and empty.
He blamed the construction of Newgate for the neglect of classification, and was yet compelled to confess that he had made no attempt whatever to carry it out.
The fact was, he did not keep the classification of prisoners on first arrival in his own hands, nor even in that of his officers.
The inspectors found that prisoners had their places assigned to them
by the inner gatesman, himself a convicted prisoner, and a "wardsman" or responsible head of a room.
The wardsman still exacted dues, of which more directly,
and this particular official took excellent care to select as residents for his own ward those most suitable from his own point of view.
"So great is the authority exercised by him,
and so numerous were his opportunities of showing favoritism, that all the prisoners may be said to be in his power.
If a man is poor and ragged, however inexperienced in crime, or however trifling may be the offense for which he has been committed
his place is assigned among the most depraved, the most experienced, and the most incorrigible offenders in the middle yard.
It must be admitted that so far but little effort had been made to counteract the evils of indiscriminate association.
It was not likely that a system which left innocent men -- for the great bulk of new arrivals were still untried
to be pitchforked by chance anywhere, into any sort of company,
within this the greatest nursery of crime in London, should exercise even the commonest care for the personal decency or comfort of the prisoners.
Their treatment was also a matter of chance. They still slept on rope mats on the floor, herded together in companies of four or more to keep one another warm
and under the scanty covering of a couple of dirty stable-rugs apiece.
So closely did they lie together, that the inspectors at their night visits found it difficult in stepping across the room to avoid treading on them.
Sometimes two mats were allotted to three sleepers. Sometimes four slept under the same bedding, and left their mats unoccupied.
The rugs used were never washed; an order existed that the bedding should be taken into the yards to be aired, but it was not very punctually obeyed.
The only convenience for personal ablutions were the pumps in the yards, and the far-off baths in the condemned or press-yard.
Water might not be taken into the ward for washing purposes.
There was some provision of clothing, but it was quite insufficient, and nothing at all was given if prisoners had enough of their own to cover their nakedness.
The inspectors paraded the prisoners, and found them generally ragged and ill-clad, squalid and filthy in the extreme;
many without stockings, and with hardly shoes to their feet;
some, who had the semblance of covering on the upper part of their feet, had no soles to the shoes, and their bare feet were on the ground.
This, too, was in the depth of the winter, and during a most inclement season.
The allowance of food was not illiberal,
but its issue was precarious, and dependent on the good will of the wardsmen, who measured out the portions to each according to his eye,
and not with weights and measures, no turnkey being present.
Too much was left to the wardsman. It was he who could issue small luxuries;
he sold tea, coffee, sugar, tobacco, although prohibited, and extra beer.
He charged a weekly sum as ward dues for the use of knives, forks, and plates
a perpetuation under another form of the old detestable custom of garnish.
He had power where his exactions were resisted of making the ward most uncomfortable for the defaulter.
He could trump up a false complaint against his fellow-prisoner, and so get him punished;
he might keep him from the fire, or give him his soup or gruel in a pail instead of a basin.
The authority of these wardsmen so improperly exalted, and so entirely unchecked, degenerated into a baneful despotism.
They bought their offices from one another, and were thus considered to have a vested interest in them.
Their original capital had been a few shillings, and for this they purchased the right to tax their fellows to the extent of pounds per week.
The wardsman had a monopoly in supplying provisions, gave dinner and breakfast at his own price, and was such complete master of the ward
that none of its inmates were suffered to make tea or coffee for themselves lest it should interfere with his sales.
He made collections when it suited him for ward purposes, to be spent as he chose, in candles and so forth.
When the wardsman was a man of some education, with some knowledge of legal chicanery gained by personal experience, he might add considerably to his emoluments
by drawing briefs and petitions for his fellows. There was a recognized charge of 5 shillings per brief,
for a petition of from 1 shilling, half pence to 8 shillings, according to its length,
and by these payments a wardsman had been known to amass as much as £40.
The man intrusted with this privilege was often the inner gatesman,
the prisoner official already mentioned, who held the fate of new arrivals as regards location in his hands.
It was not strange that he should sometimes misuse his power, and when prisoners were not to be cajoled into securing his legal services,
had been known to employ threats, declaring that he was often consulted by the governor as to a prisoner's character,
in view of speaking to it at the trial, and he could easily do them a good turn -- or a very bad one.
The brief-drawing gatesman and wardsman at the time of the inspectors' first visit must have been a particularly powerful personage.
He was on the most intimate and improperly familiar terms with the turnkeys,
had a key of both the master's side and middle side yards, was the only person present at the distribution of beer, and was trusted to examine,
and, if he chose, pass in, all provisions, money, clothes, and letters brought for prisoners by their friends.
All the wardsmen alike were more or less irresponsible.
The turnkeys complained bitterly that these old prisoners had more power than they themselves.
The governor himself admitted that a prisoner of weak intellect who had been severely beaten and much injured by a wardsman did not dare complain
the victim of this cruel ill-usage having "more fear of the power of the wardsman to injure him, than confidence in the governor's power to protect him."
These wardsmen, besides thus ruling the roast, had numerous special privileges, if such they can be called.
They were not obliged to attend chapel, and seldom if ever went; "prisoners," said one of them under examination, "did not like the trouble of going to chapel."
They had a standing bedstead to sleep on, and a good flock mattress; double allowance of provisions, filched from the common stock.
Nobody interfered with them or regulated their conduct. They might get drunk when so disposed, and did so frequently, alone or in company.
Evidence was given before the inspectors of eight or ten prisoners seen "giddy drunk, not able to sit upon forms."
The female wards-women were also given to intemperance.
The matron deposed to having seen the gates-woman "exceedingly drunk," and having been insulted by her.
There was no penalty attached to drunkenness.
A wardsman did not necessarily lose his situation for it. Nor was drink the only creature comfort he might enjoy.
He could indulge in snuff if a snuff-taker,
and might always smoke his pipe undisturbed; for although the use of tobacco had been prohibited since the report of the Lords Committee,
it was still freely introduced into the prison.
Probably authority would not have been so recklessly usurped by the wardsmen had not the proper officials too readily surrendered it.
The turnkeys left the prisoners very much to themselves, never entering the wards after locking-up time, at dusk, till unlocking next morning,
and then only went round to count the number.
Many of them were otherwise and improperly occupied for hours every day in menial services for the governor, cleaning his windows or grooming his horse.
One turnkey had been so employed several hours daily for nearly eleven years.
It was not strange that subordinates should neglect their duty when superiors set the example.
Nothing was more prominently brought out by the inspectors than the inefficiency of the governor at that time, Mr. Cope.
He may have erred in some points through ignorance, but in others he was clearly guilty of culpable neglect.
We have seen that he took no pains to classify and separate prisoners on reception.
This was only one of many grave omissions on his part. He did not feel it incumbent on himself to visit his prison often or see his prisoners.
The act prescribed that he should do both every twenty-four hours, but days passed without his entering the wards.
The prisoners declared that they did not see him oftener than twice a week;
one man who had been in the condemned ward for two months, said the governor only came there four times.
Again, a turnkey deposed that his chief did not enter the wards more than once a fortnight.
But it is only fair to Mr. Cope to state that he himself said he went whenever he could find time
and that he was constantly engaged attending sessions and going with drafts to the hulks.
But when he did visit, his inspections were of the most superficial character
sometimes he looked at his bolts and bars, but he never examined the cupboards, coal-boxes, or other possible hiding-places for cards
dice, dangerous implements, or other prohibited articles.
He only attended chapel once on Sunday, never on the week-day, and generally devoted the time service was in progress
to taking the descriptions of newly-arrived prisoners.
He really did not know what passed in his jail
and was surprised when the inspectors proved to him that practices of which he was ignorant, and which he admitted that he reprehended, went on without hindrance.
He was satisfied to let matters run on as in the old times, he said in his own justification; with him what was, was right,
and evils that should have been speedily rooted out remained because they had the prescription of long usage.
He kept no daily journal of occurrences, and nothing, however important, was recorded at the time.
The aldermen never called upon him to report, and left him nearly unsupervised and uncontrolled.
In his administration of discipline he was quite uncertain;
the punishments he inflicted were unequal,
and it was not the least part of the blame imputed to him that he made special favorites of particular prisoners, retaining of his own accord in Newgate,
and for years, felons who should have been sent beyond the seas.
But, indeed, his whole rule was far too mild, and under this mistaken leniency
the interior of the jail was more like a bear-garden or the noisy purlieus of a public-house than a prison.
It was the same old story -- evil constantly in the ascendant, the least criminal at the mercy of the most depraved.
Under the reckless contempt for regulations,
the apathy of the authorities, and the undue ascendancy of those who, as convicted felons, should have been most sternly repressed,
the most hardened and the oldest in vice had the best of it, while the inexperienced beginner went to the wall.
Edward Gibbon Wakefield, who spent three years in Newgate a little before the time of the inspectors' first report,
said with justice that "incredible scenes of horror occur in Newgate."
It was, moreover, in his opinion undoubtedly the greatest nursery of crime in London.
The days were passed in idleness, debauchery, riotous quarreling, immoral conversation,
gambling, indirect contravention of parliamentary rules, instruction in all nefarious processes,
lively discourse upon past criminal exploits, elaborate discussion of others to be perpetrated after release.
No provision whatever was made for the employment of prisoners, no materials were purchased, no trade instructors appointed.
There was no school for adults; only the boys were taught anything, and their instructor, with his assistant, were convicted prisoners.
Idle hands and unoccupied brains found in mischief the only means of whiling away the long hours of incarceration.
Gaming of all kinds, although forbidden by the Jail Acts, was habitually practiced.
This was admitted in evidence by the turnkeys, and was proved by the appearance of the prison tables, which bore the marks of gaming-boards deeply cut into them.
Prisoners confessed that it was a favorite occupation, the chief games being "shoving halfpence" on the table,
pitch in the hole, cribbage, dominoes, and common tossing, at which as much as four or five shillings would change hands in an hour.
But this was not the only amusement. Most of the wards took in the daily papers,
the most popular being the "Times," "Morning Herald," and "Morning Chronicle"; on Sunday the "Weekly Dispatch," "Bell's Life," and the "Weekly Messenger."
The newsman had free access to the prison; he passed in unsearched and unexamined, and, unaccompanied by an officer,
went at once to his customers, who bought their paper and paid for it themselves.
The news-vendor was also a tobacconist,
and he had thus ample means of introducing to the prisoners the prohibited but always much-coveted and generally procurable weed.
In the same way the wardsman laid in his stock to be retailed. Other light literature besides the daily journals were in circulation:
novels, flash songs, play-books, such as "Jane Shore," "Grimm's German Tales," with Cruikshank's illustrations,
and publications which in these days would have been made the subject of a criminal prosecution.
One of these, published by Stockdale, the inspectors styled "a book of the most disgusting nature."
There was also a good supply of Bibles and prayers,
the donation of a philanthropic gentleman, Captain Brown, but these, particularly the Bibles, bore little appearance of having been used.
Drink, in more or less unlimited quantities, was still to be had.
Spirits certainly were now excluded; but a potman, with full permission of the sheriffs,
brought in beer for sale from a neighboring public-house, and visited all the wards with no other escort than the prisoner gatesman.
The quantity to be issued per head was limited by the prison regulations to one pint
but no steps were taken to prevent any prisoner from obtaining more if he could pay for it.
The beer-man brought in as much as he pleased; he sold it without the controlling presence of an officer.
Not only did prisoners come again and again for a "pint," but large quantities were carried off to the wards to be drunk later in the day.
There were more varied, and at times, especially when beer had circulated freely, more uproarious diversions.
Wrestling, in which legs were occasionally broken, was freely indulged in; also such low games as "cobham,"
leap-frog, puss in the corner, and "fly the garter," for which purpose the rugs were spread out to prevent feet slipping on the floor.
Feasting alternated with fighting.
The weekly introduction of food, to which I shall presently refer, formed the basis of luxurious banquets, washed down by liquor
and enlivened by flash songs and thrilling long-winded descriptions of robberies and other "plants."
There was much swearing and bad language, the very worst that could be used, from the first thing in the morning to the last thing at night.
New arrivals, especially the innocent and still guileless debutant, were tormented with rude horse-play, and assailed by the most insulting "chaff."
If any man presumed to turn in too early
he was "toed," that is to say, a string was fastened to his big toe while he was asleep, and he was dragged from off his mat,
or his bedclothes were drawn away across the room.
The ragged part of the prisoners were very anxious to destroy the clothes of the better dressed, and often lighted small pieces of cloth,
which they dropped smoldering into their fellow-prisoners' pockets.
Often the victim, goaded to madness, attacked his tormentors; a fight was then certain to follow.
These fights sometimes took place in the daytime, when a ring was regularly formed, and two or three stood by the door to watch for the officer's approach.
More often they occurred at night, and were continued to the bitter end.
The prisoners in this way administered serious punishment on one another. Black eyes and broken noses were always to be seen.
More cruel injuries were common enough, which did not result from honest hand-to-hand fights.
The surgeon's journal produced to the inspectors contained numerous entries of terrible wounds inflicted in a cowardly way.
"A serious accident: one of the prisoners had a hot poker run into his eye."
"A lad named Matthew White has had a wound in his eye by a bone thrown at him, which very nearly destroyed vision."
"There was a disturbance in the transport yard yesterday evening, and the police were called in.
During the tumult a prisoner, who was one of the worst of the rioters, was bruised about the head and body.
Watkins' knee-joint is very severely injured.
A prisoner Baxter is in the infirmary in consequence of a severe injury to his wrist-joint.
Watkins' case, referred to above, is made the subject of another and a special report from the surgeon.
He was in the transport side, when one of his fellows, in endeavoring to strike another prisoner with a large poker, missed his aim, and struck Watkins' knee
Violent inflammation and extensive suppuration ensued, and for a considerable time amputation seemed inevitable.
After severe suffering prolonged for many months, the inflammation was subdued, but the cartilage of the knee-joint was destroyed, and he was crippled for life.
On another occasion a young man, who was being violently teased, seized a knife and stabbed his tormentor in the back.
The prisoner who used the knife was secured, but it was the wardsman, and not the officers, to whom the report was made, and no official inquiry or punishment followed.
Matters were at times still worse, and the rioting went on to such dangerous lengths as to endanger the safety of the building.
On one occasion a disturbance was raised which was not quelled until windows had been broken and forms and tables burnt.
The officers were obliged to go in among the prisoners to restore order with drawn cutlasses,
but the presence and authority of the governor himself became indispensable.
The worst fights occurred on Sunday afternoons; but nearly every night the act of locking up became, from the consequent removal of all supervision,
the signal for the commencement of obscene talk, revelry, and violence.
Other regulations laid down by the Jail Acts were still defied. One of these was that prisoners should be restricted to the jail allowance of food;
but all could still obtain as much extra, and of a luxurious kind, as their friends chose to bring them in.
Visitors were still permitted to come with supplies on given days of the week, about the only limitation being that the food should be cooked, and cold;
hot meat, poultry, and fish were also forbidden.
But the inspectors found in the ward cupboards mince-pies and other pasties, cold joints, hams, and so forth.
Many other articles were introduced by visitors, including money, tobacco, pipes, and snuff.
From the same source came the two or three strong files which the inspectors found in one ward,
together with four bradawls, several large iron spikes, screws, nails, and knives;
all of them instruments calculated to facilitate attempts at breaking out of prison,
and capable of becoming most dangerous weapons in the hands of desperate and determined men.
The nearly indiscriminate admission of visitors, although restricted to certain days, continued to be an unmixed evil.
The untried might see their friends three times a week, the convicted only once.
On these occasions precautions were supposed to be taken to exclude bad characters,
yet many persons of notoriously loose life continually obtained egress.
Women saw men if they merely pretended to be wives; even boys were visited by their sweethearts.
Decency was, however, insured by a line of demarcation, and visitors were kept upon each side of a separated double iron railing.
But no search was made to intercept prohibited articles at the gate, and there was no permanent gate-keeper,
which would have greatly helped to keep out bad characters. Some idea of the difficulty and inconvenience of these lax regulations as regards visiting,
may be gathered from the statement that as many as three hundred were often admitted on the same day
enough to altogether upset what small show of decorum and discipline was still preserved in the prison.
Perhaps the worst feature of the visiting system was the permission accorded to male prisoners "under the name of husbands, brothers, and sons"
to have access to the female side on Sundays and Wednesdays, in order to visit their supposed relations there.
On this female side, where the Ladies' Association still reigned supreme, more system and a greater semblance of decorum was maintained.
But there were evils akin to those on the male side, prominent amongst which was the undue influence accorded to prisoners.
A female prisoner kept the registers.
Wards-women were allowed much the same authority, with the same temptations to excess, and intoxication was not unknown among them and others.
The clothing was still meager and ragged: the washing places insufficient, and wanting in decency;
in some yards
the pump was the only provision, and this in a place within sight of visitors, of the windows of the male turnkeys, and unprotected from the weather.
There was the same crowding in the sleeping arrangements as on the male side; the same scarcity of bedding.
It was a special evil of this part of the prison, that the devotional exercises, originally so profitable, had grown into a kind of edifying spectacle,
which numbers of well-meaning but inquisitive people were anxious to witness.
Thus, when the inspectors visited there were twenty-three strangers, and only twenty-eight prisoners.
The presence of so many strangers, many of them gentlemen, distracted the prisoners' attention, and could not be productive of much good.
The separation of the sexes was not indeed rigidly carried out in Newgate as yet.
We have seen that male prisoners visited their female relations and friends on the female side. Besides this,
the gatesman who prepared the briefs had interviews with female prisoners alone while taking their instructions; a female came alone and unaccompanied by a matron
to clean the governor's office in the male prison;
male prisoners carried coal into the female prison, when they saw and could speak or pass letters to the female prisoners;
and the men could also at any time go for tea, coffee, and sugar to Mrs. Brown's shop, which was inside the female gate.
In the bail-dock, where most improper general association was permitted, the female prisoners were often altogether in the charge of male turnkeys.
The governor was also personally responsible for gross contravention of this rule of separation,
and was in the habit of drawing frequently upon the female prison for prisoners to act as domestic servants in his own private dwelling.
Some member of the Ladies' Association observed and commented upon the fact that a "young rosy-cheeked girl" had been kept by the governor from transportation,
while older women in infirm health were sent across the seas.
His excuse was that he had given the girl his promise that she should not go, an assumption of prerogative which by no means rested with him;
but he afterwards admitted that the girl had been recommended to him by the principal turnkey, who knew something of her friends.
This woman was really his servant, employed to help in cleaning, and taken on whenever there was extra work to be done.
The governor had a great dislike, he said, to seeing strangers in his house.
This girl had been first engaged on account of the extra work entailed by certain prisoners
committed by the House of Commons, who had been lodged in the governor's own house.
The house at this time was full of men and visitors; waiters came in from the taverns with meals.
Some of the prisoners had their valets, and all these were constantly in and out of the kitchen where this female prisoner was employed.
There was reveling and roistering, as usual, with "high life below-stairs.
The governor sent down wine on festive occasions, of which no doubt the prisoner housemaid had her share.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 10: The first report of the inspector of prisons.
Eighteen years had elapsed since the formation of the "Ladies' Association,"
and Mrs. Fry with her colleagues still labored assiduously in Newgate, devoting themselves mainly to the female prison,
although their ministrations were occasionally extended to the male side.
The inspectors paid tribute to the excellence of the motives of these philanthropic ladies, and recognized the good they did.
They had introduced "much order and cleanliness,"
had provided work for those who had hitherto passed their time in total idleness, and had made the treatment of female transports on the way to New South Wales
their especial care.
They had tried, moreover,
by their presence and their pious, disinterested efforts, to restrain the dissolute manners and vicious language of the unhappy and depraved inmates.
But it was already plain that they constituted an independent authority within the jails; they were frequently in conflict with the chaplain,
who not strangely resented the orders issued by the aldermen
that women should be frequently kept from chapel in order that they might attend the ladies' lectures and exhortations.
The admission of a crowd of visitors to assist in these lay services has already been remarked upon; as the inspectors pointed out,
it had the bad effect of distracting attention,
it tended to "dissipate reflection, diminish the gloom of the prison, and mitigate the punishment which the law has sentenced the prisoner to undergo."
It is to be feared too that although the surface was thus whitewashed and decorous, much that was vicious still festered and rankled beneath,
and that when the restraining influences of the ladies were absent, the female prisoners relapsed into immoral and uncleanly discourse.
Even in the daytime, when supervision was withdrawn, "the language used to be dreadful," says one of the women when under examination;
"swearing and talking of what crimes they had committed, and how they had done it." Another witness declared she had heard the most shocking language in the yard; she said
"she had never witnessed such scenes before, and hopes she never shall again -- it was dreadful!"
After locking-up time, which varied, as on the male side, according to the daylight, the scenes were often riotous and disgraceful.
The poor, who could afford no luxuries, went to bed early, but were kept awake by the revelries of the rich,
who supped royally on the supplies provided from outside, and kept it up till ten or eleven o'clock.
There were frequent quarrels and fights; shoes and other missiles were freely bandied about;
and with all this "the most dreadful oaths, the worst language, too bad to be repeated," were made use of every night.
Bad as were the various parts of the jail already dealt with,
there still remained one where the general callous indifference and mismanagement culminated in cruel culpable neglect.
The condition of the capitally-convicted prisoners after sentence was still very disgraceful. The side they occupied, still known as the press-yard,
consisted of two dozen rooms and fifteen cells. In these various chambers, until just before the inspectors made their report,
all classes of the condemned, those certain to suffer, and the larger number who were nearly certain of a reprieve,
were jumbled up together, higgledy-piggledy, the old and the young, the murderer and the child who had broken into a dwelling.
All privacy was impossible under the circumstances.
At times the numbers congregated together were very great; as many as fifty and sixty, even more, were crowded indiscriminately into the press-yard.
The better-disposed complained bitterly of what they had to endure;
one man declared that the language of the condemned rooms was disgusting, that he was dying a death every day in being compelled to associate with such characters.
In the midst of the noisy and blasphemous talk no one could pursue his meditations; any who tried to pray became the sport and ridicule of his brutal fellows.
Owing to the repeated entreaties of the criminals who could hardly hope to escape the gallows, some show of classification was carried out,
and when the inspectors visited Newgate they found the three certain to die in a day-room by themselves;
in a second room were fourteen more who had every hope of a reprieve.
The whole of these seventeen had, however, a common airing-yard, and took their exercise there at the same time,
so that men in the most awful situation, daily expecting to be hanged,
were associated continually with a number of those who could look with certainty on a mitigation of punishment.
The latter, light-hearted and reckless, conducted themselves in the most unseemly fashion, and "with as much indifference as the inmates of the other parts of the prison."
They amused themselves after their own fashion; played all day long at blind-man's-buff and leap-frog, or beat each other with a knotted handkerchief,
laughing and uproarious, utterly unmindful of the companionship of men upon whom lay the shadow of an impending shameful death.
"Men whose cases were dangerous, and those most seriously inclined, complained of these annoyances,"
so subversive of meditation, so disturbing to the thoughts;
they suffered sickening anxiety, and wished to be locked up alone. This indiscriminate association lasted for months,
during the whole of which time the unhappy convicts who had but little hope of commutation were exposed to the mockery of their reckless associates.
The brutal callousness of the bulk of the inmates of the press-yard may be gathered from the prison punishment-book, which frequently recorded such entries as the following:
Benjamin Vines and Daniel Ward put in irons for two days for breaking the windows of the day room in the condemned cells.
"Joseph Coleman put in irons for three days for striking one of the prisoners," in the same place.
There were disputes and quarrels constantly among these doomed men; it was a word and blow, an argument clenched always with a fight.
The more peaceably disposed found some occupation in making Newgate tokens,
leaden hearts, and "grinding the impressions off penny-pieces, then pricking figures or words on them to give to their friends as memorials.
Turnkeys occasionally visited the press-yard, but its occupants were under little or no control.
The chaplain, who might have been expected to make these men his peculiar care, and who at one time had visited them frequently, often several times a week,
had relaxed his efforts, because, according to his own account, he was so frequently stopped in the performance of his duties.
In his evidence before the inspectors he declared that "for years he gave his whole time to his duties, from an early hour in the morning till late in the afternoon.
He left off because he was so much interfered with and laughed at, and from seeing that no success attended his efforts, owing to the evils arising from association.
Latterly his ministrations to the condemned had been restricted to a visit on Sunday afternoons, and occasionally about once a fortnight on a week-day.
It is only fair to Mr. Cotton to add that, according to his own journal, he was unremitting in his attentions to convicts who were actually cast for death,
and the day of whose execution was fixed. He had no doubt a difficult mission to discharge;
on the one hand, the Ladies' Association, supported and encouraged by public approval, trenched upon his peculiar province;
on the other, the governor of the jail sneered at his zeal
stigmatized his often most just strictures on abuses as "a bundle of nonsense," and the aldermen, when he appealed to them for protection and countenance,
generally sided with his opponents. Nevertheless the inspectors summed up against him.
While admitting that he had had many difficulties to contend with,
and that he had again and again protested against the obstacles thrown in his way, the inspectors "cannot forbear expressing their opinion that he might have shown greater perseverance,
in the face of impediments confessedly discouraging
as regards the private teaching of prisoners; and they went on to say that "a resolved adherence, in spite of discouragements the most disheartening,
to that line of conduct which his duty imposed on him
would, it is probable, have eventually overcome the reluctance of some of the prisoners at least, and would have possessed so much moral dignity
as effectually to rebuke and abash the profane spirit of the more insolent and daring of the criminals.
The lax discipline maintained in Newgate was still further deteriorated by the presence of two other classes of prisoners who ought never to have been inmates of such a jail.
One of these were the criminal lunatics, who were at this time and for long previous continuously imprisoned there.
As the law stood since the passing of the 9th George IV. c. 40, any two justices might remove a prisoner found to be insane, either on commitment
or arraignment, to an asylum, and the Secretary of State had the same power as regards any who became insane while undergoing sentence.
These powers were not invariably put in force, and there were in consequence many unhappy lunatics in Newgate and other jails,
whose proper place was the asylum.
At the time the Lords' Committee sat there were eight thus retained in Newgate, and a return in the appendix of the Lords' report
gives a total of thirty-nine lunatics confined in various jails, many of them guilty of murder and other serious crimes.
The inspectors in the following year, on examining the facts, found that some of these poor creatures had been in confinement for long periods:
at Newgate and York Castle as long as five years; "at Ilchester and Morpeth for seven years; at Warwick for eight years,
at Buckingham and Hereford for eleven years
at Appleby for thirteen years, at Anglesea for fifteen years, at Exeter for sixteen years, and at Pembroke
for not less a period than twenty-four years.
It was manifestly wrong that such persons, "visited by the most awful of calamities," should be detained in a common prison.
Not only did their presence tend greatly to interfere with the discipline of the prison, but their condition was deplorable in the extreme.
The lunatic became the sport of the idle and the depraved. His cure was out of the question;
he was placed in a situation "beyond all others calculated to confirm his malady and prolong his sufferings."
The matter was still further complicated at Newgate by the presence within the walls of sham lunatics. Some of those included in the category
had actually been returned as sane from the asylum to which they had been sent, and there was always some uncertainty as to who was mad and who not.
Prisoners indeed were known to boast that they had saved their necks by feigning insanity.
It was high time that the unsatisfactory state of the law as regards the treatment of criminal lunatics should be remedied
and not the least of the good services rendered by the new inspectors was their inquiry into the status of these unfortunate people, and their recommendation to improve it.
The other inmates of the prison of an exceptional character, and exempted from the regular discipline, such as it was,
were the ten persons committed to Newgate by the House of Commons in 1835.
These were the gentlemen concerned in the bribery case at Ipswich in 1835,
when a petition was presented against the return of Messrs. Adam Dundas and Fitzroy Kelly. Various witnesses, including Messrs. J. B. Dasent,
Pilgrim, Bond, and Clamp, had refused to give evidence before the House of Commons' Committee; a Speaker's warrant was issued for their arrest when they absconded.
Mr. J. E. Sparrow and Mr. Clipperton
the parliamentary agents of the members whose election was impugned, were implicated in aiding and abetting the others to abscond, and a Mr. O'Mally,
counsel for the two M.P.'s, was also concerned.
Pilgrim and Dasent were caught and given into the custody of the sergeant-at-arms, and the rest were either arrested or they surrendered.
A resolution at once passed the House without division to commit the whole to Newgate, where they remained for various terms.
Dasent and Pilgrim were released in ten days, on making due submission.
O'Mally sent in a medical certificate, declaring that the imprisonment was endangering his life, and after some question he was also released.
The rest were detained for more than a month, it being considered that they were the most guilty, as being either professional agents, who advised the others to abscond,
or witnesses who did not voluntarily come forward when the chance was given them.
Many of the old customs once prevalent in the State Side, so properly condemned and abolished,
were revived for the convenience of these gentlemen, whose incarceration was thus rendered as little like imprisonment as possible.
A certain number, who could afford the high rate of a guinea per diem, fixed by the under sheriff, were lodged in the governor's house,
slept there, and had their meals provided for them from the Sessions House or London Coffee-House.
A few others, who could not afford a payment of more than half a guinea, were permitted to monopolize a part of the prison infirmary,
where the upper ward was exclusively appropriated to their use. They also had their meals sent in, and, with the food, wine almost ad libitum.
A prisoner, one of the wardsmen, waited on those in the infirmary; the occupants of the governor's house had their own servants, or the governor's.
As a rule, visitors, many of them persons of good position, came and went all day long, and as late as nine at night;
some to the infirmary, many more to the governor's house.
There were no restraints, cards and backgammon were played, and the time passed in feasting and revelry.
Even Mr. Cope admitted that the committal of this class of prisoners to Newgate was most inconvenient,
and the inspectors expressed themselves still more strongly in reprehension of the practice.
The infirmary at this particular period epitomized the condition of the jail at large.
It was diverted from its proper uses, and, as the "place of the greatest comfort," was allotted to persons who should not have been sent to Newgate at all.
All the evils of indiscriminate association were strongly accentuated by the crowd collected within its narrow limits.
"It may easily be imagined," say the inspectors, in speaking of the prison generally,
"what must be the state of discipline in a place filled with characters so various as were assembled there, where the tried and the untried, the sick and the healthy,
the sane and the insane, the young and the old, the trivial offender and the man about to suffer the extreme penalty of the law,
are all huddled together without discrimination, oversight, or control."
Enough has probably been extracted from this most damnatory report to give a complete picture of the disgraceful state in which Newgate still remained in 1835.
The inspectors, however, honestly admitted that although the site of the prison was convenient, its construction was as bad as bad could be.
Valuable space was cumbered with many long and winding passages, numerous staircases, and unnecessarily thick and cumbrous inner walls.
The wards were in some cases spacious, but they were entirely unsuited for separation or the inspection of prisoners.
The yards were narrow and confined, mainly because the ground plan was radically vicious. These were evils inseparable from the place.
But there were others remediable under a better system of management.
More attention to ventilation, which was altogether neglected and inadequate, would have secured a better atmosphere for the unhappy inmates
who constantly breathed an air heavy, and, when the wards were first opened in the morning, particularly offensive.
Again, the discipline commonly deemed inseparable from every place of durance was entirely wanting.
The primary object of committing a prisoner to jail, as the inspectors pointed out, was to deter not only the criminal himself, but others from crime,
and "to dispose him, by meditation and seclusion, to return to an honest life."
But at Newgate the convicted prisoner, instead of privation and hard fare,
"is permitted to purchase whatever his own means or the means of his friends in or out of prison can afford,
and he can almost invariably procure the luxuries of his class of life, beer and tobacco, in abundance.
Instead of seclusion and meditation, his time is passed in the midst of a body of criminals of every class and degree, in riot, debauchery, and gaming,
vaunting his own adventures, or listening to those of others;
communicating his own skill and aptitude in crime, or acquiring the lessons of greater adepts. He has access to newspapers, and of course
prefers that description which are expressly prepared for his own class, and which abound in vulgar adventure in criminal enterprise, and in the histories of the police,
the jail, and the scaffold.
He is allowed intercourse with prostitutes who, in nine cases out of ten, have originally conduced to his ruin;
and his connection with them is confirmed by that devotion and generosity towards their paramours in adversity for which these otherwise degraded women are remarkable.
Having thus passed his time, he returns a greater adept in crime, with a wider acquaintance among criminals, and, what perhaps is even more injurious to him,
is generally known to all the worst men in the country; not only without the inclination, but almost without the ability of returning to an honest life."
These pungent and well-grounded strictures applied with still greater force to the unconvicted prisoner, the man who came to the prison innocent, and still uncontaminated,
to be subjected to the same baneful influences, and to suffer the same moral deterioration, whether ultimately convicted or set free.
The whole system, or more correctly the want of system, was baneful and pernicious to the last degree.
The evils of such association were aggravated by the unbroken idleness; one "evil inflamed the other;" reformation
or any kind of moral improvement was impossible; the prisoner's career was inevitably downward, till he struck the lowest depths.
Forced and constant intercourse with the most depraved individuals of his own class;
the employment of those means and agents by which the lowest passions and the most vulgar propensities of man are perpetually kept in the highest state of excitement
drink, gaming, obscene and blasphemous language; utter idleness, the almost unrestricted admission of money and luxuries;
uncontrolled conversation with visitors of the very worst description -- prostitutes, thieves, receivers of stolen goods
all the tumultuous and diversified passions and emotions which circumstances like these must necessarily generate
forbid the faintest shadow of a hope that in a soil so unfavorable for moral culture
any awakening truth, salutary exhortation, or imperfect resolutions of amendment can take root or grow.
Strong as were the foregoing remarks, the inspectors wound up their report in still more trenchant language
framing a terrible indictment against those responsible for the condition of Newgate. Their words deserve to be quoted in full.
"We cannot close these remarks," say the inspectors, "without an expression of the painful feelings with which we submit to your Lordship
this picture of the existing state of Newgate
That in this vast metropolis, the center of wealth, civilization, and information;
distinguished as the seat of religion, worth, and philanthropy,
where is to be found in operation every expedient by which Ignorance may be superseded by Knowledge, Idleness by Industry, and Suffering by Benevolence;
that in the metropolis of this highly-favored country, to which the eyes of other lands turn for example, a system of prison discipline such as that enforced in Newgate
should be for a number of years in undisturbed operation, not only in contempt of religion and humanity,
but in opposition to the recorded denunciations of authority, and in defiance of the express enactments of the law,
is indeed a subject which cannot but impress every considerate mind with humiliation and sorrow.
We trust, however, that the day is at hand when this stain will be removed from the character of the city of London,
and when the first municipal authority of our land will be no longer subjected to the reproach of fostering an institution which outrages the rights and feelings of humanity,
defeats the ends of justice, and disgraces the profession of a Christian country.
The publication of this report raised a storm in the city, and the corporation was roused to make an immediate protest.
A committee of aldermen was forthwith appointed to report upon the inspectors' report,
and the result was another lengthy blue book, printed in the parliamentary papers, 1836,
traversing where it was possible the statements of the inspectors, and offering explanation and palliation of such evils as could not be denied.
The inspectors retorted without loss of time, reiterating their charges, and pointing out that the committee of aldermen by its own admission
justified the original allegations. It was impossible to deny the indiscriminate association; the gambling, drinking, smoking, quarreling in the jail;
the undue authority given to prisoners, the levying of garnish under another name
the neglect of the condemned convicts, the filthy condition of the wards, the insufficiency of bedding and clothing,
the misemployment of officers and prisoners by the governor.
The corporation evidently had the worst of it, and began to feel the necessity for undertaking the great work of reform.
Next year we find the inspectors expressing their satisfaction that "the full and faithful exposure which we felt it our duty to make of Newgate
has been productive of at least some advantage,
inasmuch as it has aroused the attention of those upon whom parliamentary reports and grand jury presentments had hitherto failed to make the slightest impression.
The measures of improvement introduced were mainly as follows:
the fixing of "inspection holes" in the doors and walls, so as to insure more supervision; of windows opening into the well-holes,
to give better light and ventilation; the construction of bed-places, three tiers high alongside the walls for males, two tiers for females;
the provision of dining-rooms and dining-tables.
The infirmary was enlarged, the admission of visitors limited, and the passing of articles prevented by a wire screen.
The windows were to be glazed and painted to prevent prisoners from looking out;
baths, fumigating places for clothing, wash-house, and the removal of dust-bins, completed the new arrangements in the main prison.
In the press-yard, the press-room and ward above it were parceled out into nine separate sleeping cells;
each was provided with an iron bedstead, and a small desk at which the condemned man might read or write.
But the one great and most crying evil remained unremedied.
"The mischief of jail associations," say the inspectors,
"which has been demonstrably proved to be the fruitful source of all the abuses and irregularities which have so long disgraced Newgate,
is not only permitted still to exist in the prison, but is rendered more powerful than before.
In endeavoring to arrest contamination, prisoners were more closely confined, and associated in smaller numbers;
but this had the effect of throwing them into closer contact, and of making them more intimately acquainted with, more directly influential upon, one another.
In the inspectors' fourth report, dated 1839,
they return to the charge, and again call the corporation to task for their mismanagement of Newgate.
Abuses and irregularities, which had been partially remedied by the reform introduced in 1837, were once more in the ascendant.
"In our late visits," they say, "we have seen manifest indications of a retrograde movement in this respect,
and a tendency to return to much of that laxity and remissness which formerly marked the management of this prison."
Again the following year the inspectors repeat their charge.
"The prominent evils of this prison (Newgate) -- evils which the alterations made within the last four years have failed to remove
are the association of prisoners, and the unusual contamination to which such association gives rise.
For nearly twenty-two hours out of the twenty-four the prisoners are locked up, during which time no officer is stationed in the ward with them.
Newgate is only less extensively injurious than formerly because it is less crowded.
The effects of the imprisonment are to vitiate its inmates, to extend their acquaintanceship with each other,
to corrupt the prisoner charged with an offense of which he may be innocent, and to confirm in guilt the young and inexperienced offender.
The reports as the years flow on reiterate the same complaints.
Much bitterness of feeling is evidently engendered, and the corporation grows more and more angry with the inspectors.
The prison officials appear to be on the side of the inspectors, to the great dissatisfaction of the corporation, who claimed the full allegiance and support of its servants.
In a resolution passed by the Court of Aldermen on 18th March, 1842,
I find it ordered "that the ordinary of Newgate be restricted from making any communications to the Home Office
or the Inspectors of Prisons, and that he be required wholly to confine himself to the performance of his duty as prescribed by Act of Parliament.
The inspectors were not to be deterred, however, by any opposition from the earnest discharge of their functions, and continued to report against Newgate.
In their tenth report
they state that they are compelled by an imperative sense of duty to advert in terms of decided condemnation to the lamentable condition of the prisons of the city of London,
Newgate, Giltspur St. Compter, and the City Bridewell,
in which the master evil of jail association and consequent contamination still continues to operate directly to the encouragement of crime.
The plan adopted for ventilating the dining-room on the 'master's side' and that of the middle yard is very inefficient;
it consists of several circular perforations, about two inches in diameter,
slanting downwards from the top of the walls to the outside adjoining the slaughterhouses of Newgate market; and occasionally, in hot weather,
instead of ventilating the apartments, they only serve to convey the offensive effluvia arising from the decaying animal matter into the dining-rooms.
Sometimes the stench in hot weather is said to be very bad.
Many rats also come through these so-called ventilators, as they open close to the ground at the back of the prison.
At the same time the inspectors animadvert strongly upon the misconduct of prisoners and the frequency of prison punishments,
both offenses and punishments affording a sufficient index to the practices going forward; and they wind up by declaring
that a strict compliance with their duties gave them no choice "but to report matters as we found them,
and again and again to protest against Newgate as it at present exists.
No complete and permanent improvement was indeed possible while Newgate remained unchanged.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 11: Executions, part one.
I propose to return now to the subject of Newgate executions,
which we left at the time of the discontinuance of the long-practiced procession to Tyburn.
The reasons for this change were fully set forth in a previous chapter.
The terrible spectacle was as demoralizing to the public, for whose admonition it was intended,
as the exposure was brutal and cruel towards the principal actors.
The decision to remove the scene of action to the immediate front of the jail itself
was in the right direction, as making the performance shorter and diminishing the area of display.
But the Old Bailey was not exclusively used;
at first, and for some few years after 1784, executions took place occasionally at a distance from Newgate.
This was partly due to the survival of the old notion that the scene of the crime ought also to witness the retribution;
partly perhaps because residents in and about the Old Bailey raised a loud protest against the constant erection of the scaffold in their neighborhood.
As regards the first, I find that in 1786
John Hogan, the murderer of a Mr. Odell, an attorney who resided in Charlotte Street, Rathbone Place,
was executed on a gibbet in front of his victim's house.
Lawrence Jones, a burglar, was in 1793 ordered for execution in Hatton Garden, near the house he had robbed;
and when he evaded the sentence by suicide, his body was exhibited in the same neighborhood,
extended upon a plank on the top of an open cart, in his clothes, and fettered.
Again, as late as 1809 and 1812, Execution Dock, on the banks of the Thames, was still retained.
Here John Sutherland, commander of the British armed transport 'The Friends,' suffered on the 29th June, 1809,
for the murder of his cabin-boy, whom he stabbed after much ill-usage on board the ship as it lay in the Tagus.
On the 18th December, 1812,
two sailors, Charles Palm and Sam Tilling, were hanged at the same place for the murder of their captain, James Keith
of the trading vessel 'Adventure,' upon the high seas.
They were taken in a cart to the place of execution, amidst a vast concourse of people.
Palm, as soon as he was seated in the cart,
put a quid of tobacco into his mouth, and offered another to his companion, who refused it with indignation
Some indications of pity were offered for the fate of Tilling; Palm, execration alone.
But the Old Bailey gradually, and in spite of all objections urged, monopolized the dread business of execution.
The first affair of the kind on this spot was on the 3rd December, 1783,
when, in pursuance of an order issued by the Recorder to the sheriffs of Middlesex and the keeper of His Majesty's jail, Newgate,
a scaffold was erected in front of that prison for the execution of several convicts named by the Recorder.
Ten were executed
the scaffold hung with black; and the inhabitants of the neighborhood, having petitioned the sheriffs to remove the scene of execution to the old place,
were told that the plan had been well considered, and would be persevered in.
The following 23rd April, it is stated that the malefactors ordered for execution on the 18th instead
were brought out of Newgate about eight in the morning, and suspended on a gallows of a new construction.
After hanging the usual time they were taken down, and the machine cleared away in half-an-hour.
By practice the art is much improved, and there is no part of the world in which villains are hanged in so neat a manner, and with so little ceremony.
A full description of this new gallows, which was erected in front of the debtors' door, is to be found in contemporary records.
The criminals are not exposed to view till they mount the fatal stage. The last part of the stage, or that next to the jail,
is enclosed by a temporary roof, under which are placed two seats for the reception of the sheriffs, one on each side of the stairs leading to the scaffold.
Round the north, west, and south sides are erected galleries for the reception of officers, attendants, etc.
and at the distance of five feet from the same is fixed a strong railing all round the scaffold to enclose a place for the constables.
In the middle of this machinery is placed a movable platform, in form of a trap-door, ten feet long by eight wide,
on the middle of which is placed the gibbet, extending from the jail across the Old Bailey.
This movable platform is raised six inches higher than the rest of the scaffold, and on it the convicts stand;
it is supported by two beams, which are held in their place by bolts. The movement of the lever withdraws the bolts, the platform falls in;
and this, being much more sudden and regular than that of a cart being drawn away, has the effect of immediate death.
A broadsheet dated April 24th, 1787, describing an execution on the newly-invented scaffold before the debtors' door,
says, "The scaffold on which these miserable people suffered is a temporary machine which was drawn out of the yard of the sessions house by horses;
it is supported by strong posts fixed into grooves made in the street;
the whole is temporary, being all calculated to take to pieces, which are preserved within the prison."
This contrivance appears to have been copied with improvements from that which had been used in Dublin at a still earlier date,
for that city claims the priority in establishing the custom of hanging criminals at the jail itself.
The Dublin "engine of death," as the gallows are styled in the account from which the following description is taken, consisted of an iron bar
parallel to the prison wall, and about four feet from it, but strongly affixed thereto with iron scroll clamps.
From this bar hang several iron loops, in which the halters are tied.
Under this bar at a proper distance is a piece of flooring or platform,
projecting somewhat beyond the range of the iron bar, and swinging upon hinges affixed to the wall.
The entrance upon this floor or leaf is from the middle window over the gate of the prison;
and this floor is supported below,
while the criminals stand upon it, by two pieces of timber, which are made to slide in and out of the prison wall through apertures made for that purpose.
When the criminals are tied up and prepared for their fate, this floor suddenly falls down, upon withdrawing the supporters inwards.
They are both drawn at once by a windlass, and the unhappy culprits remain suspended.
This mode of execution, it is alleged, gave rise to the old vulgar "chaff," "Take care, or you'll die at the fall of the leaf."
The machinery in use in Dublin is much the same as that employed at many jails now-a-days.
But the fall apart and inwards of two leaves is considered superior.
The latter is the method still followed at Newgate.
The sentences inflicted in front of Newgate were not limited to hanging.
In the few years which elapsed between the establishment of the gallows at Newgate
and the abolition of the practice of burning females for petty treason, more than one woman suffered this penalty at the Old Bailey.
One case is preserved by Catnach,
that of Phoebe Harris, who in 1788 was "barbariously" executed and burnt before Newgate for coining.
She is described as a well-made little woman, something more than thirty years of age, of a pale complexion and not disagreeable features.
When she came out of prison she appeared languid and terrified, and trembled greatly as she advanced to the stake,
where the apparatus for the punishment she was about to experience
seemed to strike her mind with horror and consternation, to the exclusion of all power of recollectedness in preparation for the approaching awful moment.
She walked from the debtors' door to a stake fixed in the ground about half-way between the scaffold and Newgate Street.
She was immediately tied by the neck to an iron bolt fixed near the top of the stake,
and after praying fervently for a few minutes, the steps on which she stood were drawn away, and she was left suspended.
A chain fastened by nails to the stake was then put round her body by the executioner with his assistants.
Two cart-loads of faggots were piled about her, and after she had hung for half-an-hour the fire was kindled.
The flames presently burned the halter, the body fell a few inches, and hung then by the iron chain.
The fire had not quite burnt out at twelve, in nearly four hours, that is to say.
A great concourse of people attended on this melancholy occasion.
As many spectators as ever thronged to see the dreadful show,
and they were packed into a more limited space, disporting themselves as heretofore by brutal horse-play, coarse jests, and frantic yells.
It was still the custom to offer warm encouragement or bitter disapproval, according to the character and antecedents of the sufferer.
The highwayman, whose exploits many in the crowd admired or emulated, was cheered and bidden to die game;
the man of better birth could hope for no sympathy, whatever his crime.
At the execution of Governor Wall, in 1802, the furious hatred of the mob was plainly apparent in their appalling cries.
His appearance on the scaffold was the signal for three prolonged shouts from an innumerable populace, "the brutal effusion of one common sentiment."
It was said that so large a crowd had never collected since the execution of Mrs. Brownrigg, nor had the public indignation risen so high.
Pieman and ballad-monger did their usual roaring trade amidst the dense throng.
No sooner was the "job" finished than half-a-dozen competitors appeared, each offering the identical rope for sale at a shilling an inch.
One was the "yeoman of the halter," a Newgate official, the executioner's assistant, whom Mr. J. T. Smith, who was present at the execution,
describes as "a most diabolical-looking little wretch -- Jack Ketch's head man.
The yeoman was, however, under-sold by his wife, "Rosy Emma,"
exuberant in talk and hissing hot from Pie Corner, where she had taken her morning dose of gin-and-bitters.
A little further off, says Mr. Smith, was "a lath of a fellow past three-score years and ten,
who had just arrived from the purlieus of Black Boy Alley, woebegone as Romeo's apothecary, exclaiming,
Here's the identical rope at sixpence an inch.
Mr. Smith's account of the condemned convict, whose cell he was permitted to enter, may be inserted here.
He was introduced by the ordinary, Dr. Forde, a name familiar to the reader, who met him at the felons' door
in his canonicals, and with his head as stiffly erect as a sheriff's coachman.
The ordinary "gravely uttered, 'Come this way, Mr. Smith.'
As we crossed the press yard a cock crew, and the solitary clanking of a restless chain was dreadfully horrible.
The prisoners had not risen.
They entered a "stone cold room," and were presently joined by the prisoner.
He was death's counterfeit, tall, shriveled, and pale;
and his soul shot out so piercingly through the port-holes of his head, that the first glance of him nearly petrified me
His hands were clasped, and he was truly penitent.
After the yeoman had requested him to stand up, 'he pinioned him,' as the Newgate phrase is
and tied the cord with so little feeling that the governor (Wall), who had not given the wretch his accustomed fee, observed,
"You have tied me very tight," upon which Dr. Forde ordered him to slacken the cord, which he did, but not without muttering.
"Thank you, sir," said the governor to the doctor, "it is of little moment."
He then made some observations to the attendant about the fire, and turning to the doctor, questioned him.
"Do tell me, sir; I am informed I shall go down with great force; is it so?"
After the construction and action of the machine had been explained, the doctor asked the governor what kind of men he had commanded at Goree,
where the murder for which he was condemned had been committed.
"Sir," he answered, "they sent me the very riff-raff."
The poor soul then joined the doctor in prayer, and never did I witness more contrition at any condemned sermon than he then evinced.
The sheriff arrived, attended by his officers, to receive the prisoner from the keeper.
A new hat was partly flattened on his head, for, owing to its being too small in the crown, it stood many inches too high behind.
As we were crossing the press yard,
the dreadful execrations of some of the felons so shook his frame that he observed "the clock had struck;" and quickening his pace,
he soon arrived at the room where the sheriff was to give a receipt for his body, according to the usual custom.
Before the colonel had been pinioned he had pulled out two white handkerchiefs, one of which he bound over his temples so as nearly to conceal his eyes,
Over the handkerchief around his brows he placed a white cap, the new hat being on top of all.
He was dressed in a mixed-colored loose coat with a black collar, swandown waistcoat, blue pantaloons, and white silk stockings.
Thus appareled he ascended the stairs at the debtors' door,
and stepped out on to the platform, to be received, as has been said, by prolonged yells.
These evidently deprived him of the small portion of fortitude he had summoned up.
He bowed his head under extreme pressure of ignominy,
and at his request the ordinary drew the cap further down over his face, when in an instant,
without waiting for any signal, the platform dropped, and he was launched into eternity.
the doubtfulness of the issue, or the superior position of the perpetrator,
the attendance at the execution was certain to be tumultuous, and the conduct of the mob disorderly.
This was notably the case at the execution of Holloway and Haggerty
in 1807, an event long remembered from the fatal and disastrous consequences which followed it.
They were accused by a confederate, who, goaded by conscience, had turned approver, of the murder of a Mr. Steele,
who kept a lavender warehouse in the city, and who had gardens at Feltham,
whither he often went to distill the lavender, returning to London the same evening.
One night he was missing
and after a long interval his dead body was discovered, shockingly disfigured, in a ditch. This was in 1802.
Four years passed without the detection of the murderers,
but in the beginning of 1807 one of them, at that time just sentenced to transportation,
made a full confession, and implicated Holloway and Haggerty.
They were accordingly apprehended and brought to trial, the informer, Hanfield by name, being accepted as king's evidence.
Conviction followed mainly on his testimony; but the two men, especially Holloway, stoutly maintained their innocence to the last.
Very great excitement prevailed in the town throughout the trial, and this greatly increased when the verdict was known.
An enormous crowd assembled to witness the execution, amounting, it was said, to the hitherto unparalleled number of 40,000.
By eight o'clock not an inch of ground in front of the platform was unoccupied.
Very soon women began to scream with terror;
some, especially of low stature, found it difficult to remain standing, and several, although held up for some time by the men nearest them,
presently fell, and were at once trampled to death.
Cries of Murder! murder! were now raised, and added greatly to the horrors of the scene.
Panic became general. More women, children, and many men were borne down, to perish beneath the feet of the rest.
The most affecting and distressing scene was at Green Arbor Lane, just opposite the debtors' door of the prison.
Here a couple of piemen had been selling their wares; the basket of one of them, which was raised upon a four-legged stool, was upset.
The pieman stooped down to pick up his scattered stock, and some of the mob, not seeing what had happened, stumbled over him.
No one who fell ever rose again.
Among the rest was a woman with an infant at the breast.
She was killed, but in the act of falling she forced her child into the arms of a man near her, and implored him in God's name to save it;
the man, needing all his care for his own life, threw the child from him,
and it passed along the heads of the crowd, to be caught at last by a person who struggled with it to a cart and deposited it there in safety.
In another part seven persons met their death by suffocation.
In this convulsive struggle for bare existence people fought fiercely with one another, and the weakest, of course the women, went under.
This went on for more than an hour, and until the malefactors were cut down and the gallows removed;
then the mob began to thin, and the streets were cleared by the city marshals and a number of constables.
The catastrophe exceeded the worst anticipations. Nearly one hundred dead and dying lay about; and after all had been removed,
the bodies for identification, the wounded to hospitals, a cart-load of shoes, hats, petticoats, and fragments of wearing apparel were picked up.
Among the dead was a sailor lad whom no one knew;
he had his pockets filled with bread and cheese, and it was generally supposed that he had come a long distance to see the fatal show.
A tremendous crowd assembled when Bellingham was executed in 1812 for the murder of Spencer Percival, at that time prime minister;
but there were no serious accidents, beyond those caused by the goring of a maddened, over-driven ox which forced its way through the crowd.
Precautions had been taken by the erection of barriers, and the posting of placards at all the avenues to the Old Bailey, on which was printed,
Beware of entering the crowd! Remember thirty poor persons were pressed to death by the crowd when Haggerty and Holloway were executed!
The concourse was very great, notwithstanding these warnings.
It was still greater at Fauntleroy's execution in 1824, when no less than 100,000 persons assembled, it was said.
Every window and roof which could command a view of the horrible performance was occupied.
All the avenues and approaches, places even whence nothing whatever could be seen of the scaffold,
were blocked by persons who had overflowed from the area in front of the jail.
At Courvoisier's execution in 1840 it was the same, or worse.
As early as six a.m. the number assembled already exceeded that seen on ordinary occasions;
by seven a.m. the whole space was so thronged that it was impossible to move one way or the other.
Some persons were kept for more than five hours standing against the barriers, and many nearly fainted from exhaustion.
Every window had its party of occupants; the adjoining roofs were equally crowded.
High prices were asked and paid for front seats or good standing room. As much as £5 was given for the attic story
of the Lamb's Coffee House;
£2 was a common price for a window.
At the George public-house to the south of the drop, Sir W. Watkin Wynn, Baronet,
hired a room for the night and morning, which he and a large party of friends occupied before and during the execution;
in an adjoining house, that of an undertaker, was Lord Alfred Paget, also with several friends.
Those who had hired apartments spent the night in them, keeping up their courage with liquids and cigars.
Numbers of ladies were present, although the public feeling was much against their attendance.
One well-dressed woman fell out of a first-floor window on to the shoulders of the crowd below, but neither she nor any one else was greatly hurt.
The city authorities had endeavored to take all precautions against panic and excitement among the crowd,
and caused a number of stout additional barriers to be erected in front of the scaffold,
and although one of these gave way owing to the extraordinary pressure, no serious accident occurred.
Some years later an eye-witness published a graphic account of one of these scenes.
Soon after midnight on the Sunday night, for by this time the present practice of executing on Monday morning had been pretty generally introduced,
the crowd began to congregate in and about the Old Bailey.
Gin-shops and coffee-houses were the first to open doors, and touts began to bid for tenants for the various rooms upstairs.
Cries of "Comfortable room!" "Excellent situation!" "Beautiful prospect!" "Splendid view!" resounded on every side.
By this time the workmen might be heard busily erecting the gallows;
the sounds of hammer and saw intermingled with the broad jeers and coarse jests of the rapidly increasing mob.
One by one the huge uprights of black timber were fitted together,
until presently the huge stage loomed dark above the crowd which was now ranged round the barriers;
a throng of people whom neither rain, snow, storm, nor darkness ever hindered from attending the show.
They were mainly members of the criminal classes.
their conversation was of companions and associates of former years, long ago imprisoned, transported, hanged, while they,
hoary-headed and hardened in guilt, were still at large.
They talked of the days when the convicts were hung up a dozen or more in a row;
of those who had shown the white, and those who had died game.
The approaching ceremony had evidently no terrors for these "idolaters of the gallows."
With them were younger men and women:
the former already vowed to the same criminal career, and looking up to their elders with the respect due to successful practitioners;
the latter unsexed and brutalized by dissipation,
slipshod and slovenly, in crushed bonnet and dirty shawl, the gown fastened by a single hook,
their harsh and half-cracked voices full of maudlin, besotted sympathy for those about to die.
Above the murmur and tumult of that noisy assembly, the lowing and bleating of cattle as they were driven into the stalls and pens of Smithfield
fell with a strange unnatural sound upon the ear
Hush! the unceasing murmur of the mob now breaks into a loud deep roar,
a sound as if the ocean had suddenly broken through some ancient boundary, against which its ever restless billows had for ages battered;
the wide dark sea of heads is all at once in motion;
each wave seems trying to overleap the other as they are drawn onwards towards this outlet.
Every link in that great human chain is shaken, along the whole lengthened line has the motion jarred, and each in turn sees,
coiled up on the floor of the scaffold like a serpent, the hangman's rope!
The human hand that placed it there was only seen for a moment,
as it lay, white and ghastly, upon the black boards, and then again was as suddenly withdrawn, as if ashamed of the deed it had done.
The loud shout of the multitude once more subsided, or only fell upon the abstracted ear like the dreamy murmur of an ocean shell.
Then followed sounds more distinct and audible, in which ginger-beer, pies, fried fish, sandwiches, and fruit
were vended under the names of notorious murderers, highwaymen, and criminals,
famous in the annals of Newgate for the hardihood they had displayed in the hour of execution, when they terminated their career of crime at the gallows.
Threading his way among these itinerant vendors was seen the meek-faced deliverer of tracts, the man of good intentions, now bonneted,
now laughed at, the skirt of his seedy black coat torn across; yet,
though pulled right and left, or sent headlong into the crowd by the swing of some brutal and muscular arm,
Never once from that pale face passed away its benign and patient expression.
but ever the same form moved along in the fulfillment of his mission, in spite of all persecution.
Another fight followed the score which had already taken place; this time two women were the combatants.
Blinded with their long hair, they tore at each other like two furies; their bonnets and caps were trodden underfoot in the kennel,
and lay disregarded beside the body of the poor dog which, while searching for its master in the crowd,
was an hour before kicked to death by the savage and brutal mob.
Another deep roar, louder than any which had preceded it, broke from the multitude.
Then came the cry of 'Hats off!' and 'Down in front!' as at a theatre.
It was followed by the deep and solemn booming of the death-bell from the church of St. Sepulchre
the iron knell that rang upon the beating heart of the living man who was about to die;
and with blanched cheek, and sinking, we turned away from the scene.
In thus describing the saturnalia before the gallows I have been drawn on somewhat beyond the period with which I am at present dealing.
Let me retrace my steps, and speak more in detail of the treatment of the condemned in those bloodthirsty and brutally indifferent days,
and of their demeanor after sentence until the last penalty was paid.
One of the worst evils was the terrible and long-protracted uncertainty as to the result.
In the case of convicted murderers only was prompt punishment inflicted,
and with them indeed this dispatch amounted to undue precipitancy.
Forty-eight hours was the limit of time allowed to the unhappy man to make his peace, and during that time he was still kept on a bare allowance of bread and water.
But the murderers formed only a small proportion of the total number sentenced to death, and for the rest there was a long period of anxious suspense,
although in the long run mercy generally prevailed, and very few capitally convicted for crimes less than murder actually suffered.
Thus in the years between May 1st, 1827, and 30th April, 1831,
no less than four hundred and fifty-one sentences of death for capital crimes were passed at the Old Bailey;
but of these three hundred and ninety-six were reversed by the king in council, and only fifty-two were really executed.
Already the severity of our criminal code, and the number of capital felonies upon the statute book, had brought a reaction;
and while the courts adhered to the letter of the law, appeals were constantly made to the royal prerogative of mercy.
This was more particularly the practice in London.
Judges on assize were satisfied with simply recording a sentence of death against offenders whom they did not think deserved the extreme penalty.
At the Old Bailey almost every one capitally convicted by a jury was sentenced to be hanged.
The result in the latter case was left in the first place to the king in council,
but there was a further appeal then, as now, to the king himself, or practically to the Home Secretary.
Neither in town or country were cases entirely taken on their own merits.
Convicted offenders might have good or bad luck; they might be arraigned when their particular crime was uncommon, and were then nearly certain to escape;
or theirs might be one of many, and it might be considered necessary to "make an example."
In this latter it might fairly be said that a man was put to death less for his own sins than for the crimes of others.
The absurdity of the system, its irregularity and cruelty, were fully touched upon by the inspectors of prisons in their first report.
They found at Newgate, under disgraceful conditions as already described,
seventeen capital convicts, upon all of whom the sentence of death had been passed. Eventually two only of the whole number suffered;
two others were sentenced to three months' imprisonment, and the balance to varying terms.
Nothing could be more strongly marked than the contrast between the ultimate destiny of different individuals all abiding the same awful doom:
on the one hand the gallows, on the other a short imprisonment.
The inspectors very properly desired to call attention to the inevitable tendency in this mode of dealing with "the most awful sanctions of the law,"
to make those sanctions an object of contemptuous mockery.
The consequences were plainly proved to the inspectors.
Capitally convicted prisoners did, as a matter of fact, "treat with habitual and inexpressible levity the sentence of death."
Of this I have treated at length in the last chapter.
The time thus spent varied considerably,
but it was seldom less than six weeks. It all depended upon the sovereign's disposition to do business.
Sometimes the Privy Council did not meet for months, and during all that time the convicts languished with hope
nearly indefinitely deferred.
When the council had decided, the news was conveyed to Newgate by the Recorder, who made his "report," as it was called.
The time of the arrival of this report was generally known at Newgate,
and its contents were anxiously awaited by both convicts in the press-yard and their friends collected in a crowd outside the gates.
Sometimes the report was delayed.
On one occasion, Mr. Wakefield tells us, the Recorder, who had attended the council at Windsor, did not deliver the report till the following day.
The prisoners and their friends, therefore, were kept in a state of the most violent suspense for many hours,
during which they counted the moments -- the prisoners in their cells as usual, and their friends in the street in front of Newgate, where they passed the night.
I have heard the protracted agony of both classes described by those who witnessed it in terms so strong, that I am unwilling to repeat them.
The crowd of men and women who passed the night in front of Newgate, began, as soon as the hour was passed when they had expected the report,
to utter imprecations against the Recorder, the Secretary of State, the Council, and the King;
they never ceased cursing until the passion of anger so excited was exchanged for joy in some and grief in others.
I myself heard more than one of those whose lives were spared by that decision of the council,
afterwards express a wish to murder the Recorder for having kept them so long in suspense.
The Recorder's report generally reached Newgate late at night.
Its receipt was immediately followed by the promulgation of its contents to the persons most closely concerned,
which was done with a sort of ceremony intended to be impressive.
The whole of the convicts were assembled together in one ward, and made to kneel down.
To them entered the chaplain or ordinary of Newgate in full canonicals,
who in solemn tones communicated to each in turn the fate in store for him.
The form of imparting the intelligence was generally the same.
"So-and-so, I am sorry to tell you that it is all against you;" or,
"A. B., your case has been taken into consideration by the king in council, and His Majesty has been mercifully pleased to spare your life."
The fatal news was not always received in the same way.
The men who were doomed often fell down in convulsions upon the floor.
Sometimes any who had had a narrow escape fainted, but the bulk of those respited looked on with unfeeling indifference.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 12: Executions, part two.
It is satisfactory to be able to record that some consideration was shown the capital convict actually awaiting execution.
Even so severe a critic as Mr. Wakefield states that "a stranger to the scene
would be astonished to observe the peculiar tenderness, I was going to add respect,
which persons under sentence of death obtain from all the officers of the prison.
Before sentence a prisoner has only to observe the regulations of the jail in order to remain neglected and unnoticed.
Once ordered to the cells, friends of all classes suddenly rise up; his fellow-prisoners, the turnkeys, the chaplain,
the keepers, and the sheriffs all seem interested in his fate, and he can make no reasonable request that is not at once granted by whomsoever he may address.
This rule has some, but very few, exceptions; such as where a hardened offender behaves with great levity and brutality, as if he cared nought for his life,
and thought every one anxious to promote his death.
Mr. Wakefield goes on to remark that persons convicted of forgery "excited an extraordinary degree of interest in all who approached them."
This was noticeable with Fauntleroy, who, on account of his birth and antecedents, was allowed to occupy a turnkey's room,
and kept altogether separate from the other prisoners until the day of his death.
It cannot be denied, however, that the ordinary's treatment was somewhat unfeeling, and in proof thereof
I will quote an extract from the reverend gentleman's own journal.
He seems to have improved the occasion when preaching the condemned sermon before Fauntleroy, by pointing a moral from that unhappy man's own case.
For this the chaplain was a few days later summoned before the jail committee of aldermen,
and informed that the public would not in future be admitted to hear the condemned sermon. "I was also informed," writes Mr. Cotton,
that this resolution was in consequence of their (the aldermen's) disapproving of the last discourse delivered by me,
previous to the execution of Henry Fauntleroy for uttering a forged security
in which it was said I had enlarged upon the heinous nature of his crime, and warned the public to avoid such conduct.
I was informed that this unnecessarily harassed his feelings, and that the object of such sermons was solely to console the prisoner,
and that from the time of his conviction nothing but what is consolatory should be addressed to a criminal.
One of the aldermen, moreover, informed me that the whole court of aldermen were unanimous in their opinion on this subject.
As to the exclusion of strangers on these occasions,
the experience I have had convinces me that one, and perhaps the only, good of an execution, i. e. the solemn admonition to the public,
will thereby be lost.
Probably the reader will side with the aldermen against the ordinary.
This episode throws some doubt upon the tenderness and proper feeling exhibited by the chaplain towards the most deserving members of his criminal flock;
and the idea will be strengthened by the following account of the Sunday service in the prison chapel on the occasion when the condemned sermon was preached.
The extract is from Mr. E. Gibbon Wakefield's brochure, the date 1828, just three years after Fauntleroy's death.
Strangers were now excluded, but the sheriffs attended in state, wearing their gold chains,
while behind their pew stood a couple of tall footmen in state liveries.
The sheriffs were in one gallery;
in the other opposite were the convicts capitally convicted who had been respited.
Down below between the galleries was the mass of the prison population;
the schoolmaster and the juvenile prisoners being seated round the communion-table, opposite the pulpit.
In the center of the chapel was the condemned pew, a large dock-like erection painted black.
Those who sat in it were visible to the whole congregation, and still more to the ordinary,
whose desk and pulpit were just in front of the condemned pew, and within a couple of yards of it.
The occupants of this terrible black pew were the last always to enter the chapel.
Upon the occasion which I am describing they were four in number; and here I will continue the narrative in Mr. Wakefield's own words:
First is a youth of eighteen, condemned for stealing in a dwelling-house goods valued above five pounds.
His features have no felonious cast;
he steps boldly with head upright, looks to the women's gallery, and smiles. His intention is to pass for a brave fellow,
but the attempt fails; he trembles, his knees knock together, and his head droops as he enters the condemned pew.
The next convict is clearly and unmistakably a villain.
He is a hardened offender, previously cast for life, reprieved, transported to Australia, and since returned without pardon.
For this offense the punishment is death.
He has, however, doubly earned his sentence, and is actually condemned for burglary committed since his arrival in England.
His look at the sheriffs and the ordinary is full of scorn and defiance.
The third convict is a sheep-stealer, a poor ignorant fellow in whose crime are mitigating circumstances,
but who is left to die on the supposition that this is not his first conviction, and still more because a good many sheep have of late been stolen by other people.
He is quite content to die;
indeed the chaplain and others have brought him firmly to believe that his situation is enviable, and that the gates of heaven are open to receive him.
The last of the four is said to have been a clergyman of the Church of England, condemned for forgery, "a miserable old man in a tattered suit of black.
Already he is half dead.
Great efforts have been made to save his life.
Friends, even utter strangers, have interceded for him, and to the last he has buoyed himself up by hope of reprieve.
Now his doom is sealed irrevocably, and he has given himself up to despair.
He staggers towards the pew, reels into it, stumbles forward, flings himself on the ground, and, by a curious twist of the spine,
buries his head under his body.
The sheriffs shudder, their inquisitive friends crane forward, the keeper frowns on the excited congregation,
the lately smirking footmen close their eyes and forget their liveries, the ordinary clasps his hands, the turnkeys cry 'Hush!'
and the old clerk lifts up his cracked voice, saying, 'Let us sing to the praise and glory of God.'
The morning hymn is sung first, as if to remind the condemned that next morning at eight a.m. they are to die.
The service proceeds. At last the burial service is reached.
The youth alone is able to read, but from long want of practice he is at a loss to find the place in his prayer-book.
The ordinary observes him, looks to the sheriffs, and says aloud, 'The service for the dead!'
The youth's hands tremble as they hold the book upside down.
The burglar is heard to mutter an angry oath.
The sheep-stealer smiles, and, extending his arms upwards, looks with a glad expression to the roof of the chapel.
The forger has never moved.
Let us pass on.
All have sung 'the Lamentation of a Sinner,' and have seemed to pray 'especially for those now awaiting the awful execution of the law.'
We come to the sermon.
The ordinary of Newgate is an orthodox, unaffected, Church of England divine,
who preaches plain, homely discourses, as fit as any religious discourse can be fit for the irritated audience.
The sermon of this day, whether eloquent or plain, useful or useless, must produce a striking effect at the moment of its delivery.
The text, without another word, is enough to raise the wildest passions of the audience
For a while the preacher addresses himself to the congregation at large, who listen attentively
except the clergyman and the burglar, the former of whom is still rolled up at the bottom of the condemned pew,
while the eyes of the latter are wandering round the chapel, and one of them is occasionally winked impudently at some acquaintance amongst the prisoners for trial.
At length the ordinary pauses, and then, in a deep tone, which, though hardly above a whisper, is audible to all, says,
'Now for you, my poor fellow mortals, who are about to suffer the last penalty of the law.'
But why should I repeat the whole?
It is enough to say that in the same solemn tone he talks about the minutest of crimes, punishments, bonds, shame,
ignominy, sorrow, sufferings, wretchedness, pangs,
childless parents, widows and helpless orphans, broken and contrite hearts, and death tomorrow morning for the benefit of society.
The dying men are dreadfully agitated.
The young stealer in a dwelling-house no longer has the least pretense to bravery. He grasps the back of the pew,
his legs give way, he utters a faint groan, and sinks on the floor.
Why does no one stir to help him? Where would be the use? The hardened burglar moves not, nor does he speak;
but his face is of an ashy paleness; and if you look carefully you may see the blood trickling from his lip,
which he has bitten unconsciously, or from rage, or to rouse his fainting courage.
The poor sheep-stealer is in a frenzy.
He throws his hands far from him, and shouts aloud, 'Mercy, good Lord! mercy is all I ask. The Lord in His mercy come!
There! there! I see the Lamb of God! Oh! how happy! Oh! this is happy!
Meanwhile the clergyman, still bent into the form of a sleeping dog,
struggles violently; his feet, legs, hands, and arms, even the muscles of his back,
move with a quick, jerking motion, not naturally, but, as it were, like the affected parts of a galvanized corpse.
Suddenly he utters a short sharp scream, and all is still.
The silence is short. As the ordinary proceeds 'to conclude,'
the women set up a yell, which is mixed with a rustling noise, occasioned by the removal of those whose hysterics have ended in fainting.
The sheriffs cover their faces, and one of their inquisitive friends blows his nose with his glove.
The keeper tries to appear unmoved, but his eye wanders anxiously over the combustible assembly.
The children round the communion-table stare and gape with childish wonder.
The two masses of prisoners for trial undulate and slightly murmur,
while the capital convicts who were lately in that black pew appear faint with emotion.
This exhibition lasts for some minutes, and then the congregation disperses,
the condemned returning to the cells: the forger carried by turnkeys; the youth sobbing aloud convulsively, as a passionate child;
the burglar muttering curses and savage expressions of defiance; whilst the poor sheep-stealer shakes hands with the turnkeys,
whistles merrily, and points upwards with madness in his look.
Mr. Wakefield winds up his graphic but somewhat sensational account by describing another religious service, which may appropriately be inserted here.
He says, "On the day of execution there is no service in the chapel of Newgate.
On the following day the capital convicts, whose companions have been hanged, are required to return thanks for their narrow escape.
The firmest disbeliever in religion, if he had not lately been irritated by taking part in such a scene as the condemned service in Newgate,
could hardly witness this ceremony without being affected. The men, who were so lately snatched from the jaws of death,
kneel, whilst the rest of the congregation sit, and the ordinary, in a tone of peculiar solemnity, says,
Almighty God, Father of all mercies, we thine unworthy servants do give thee most humble and hearty thanks
for all thy goodness and loving-kindness to us, and to all men;
particularly to those who desire now to offer up their praises and thanksgivings for thy late mercies vouchsafed unto them.
Could any one, knowing the late situation of the kneeling men, looking as they do at the empty pew,
occupied when they saw it last, but a few hours ago, by their comrades who are now dead;
could any one, not disgusted with the religious ceremonials of Newgate, witness this scene without emotion?
Hardly any one.
But what are the feelings of those who take part in it?
I have been present at the scene not less than twenty times, and have invariably observed
that many of the kneeling men or boys laughed while they knelt, pinched each other, and, when they could do so without fear of being seen by any officer of the prison,
winked at other prisoners in derision of what was taking place; and I have frequently heard men and lads who had been of the kneeling party
boast to their companions after the service that they had wiped their eyes during the thanksgiving, to make the ordinary believe they had been crying.
Although this misapplication of religious services still went on,
the outside public continued to be excluded from the Newgate chapel on the day the condemned sermon was preached.
This very proper rule was, however, set aside on the Sunday preceding Courvoisier's execution.
So many applications for admission were made to the sheriffs,
that they reluctantly agreed to open the gallery which had formerly been occupied by strangers on these occasions.
Cards were issued, and to such an extent, that although the service was not to commence till half-past ten, by nine a.m.
all the avenues to the prison gates were blocked by ticket-holders.
In spite of the throng, owing to the excellent arrangements made by the sheriffs,
no inconvenience was suffered by the congregation, among whom were Lord Adolphus Fitz Clarence, Lord Coventry,
Lord Paget, Lord Bruce, several members of the House of Commons, and a few ladies.
Contemporary accounts give a minute description of the demeanor of the convict upon this solemn occasion.
He sat on a bench before the pulpit, -- the hideous condemned pew had been swept away, -- and never once raised his eyes during the service.
In fact his looks denoted extreme sorrow and contrition,
and he seemed to suffer great inward agitation when the ordinary particularly alluded to the crime for the perpetration of which he stood condemned.
Mr. Carver, the ordinary, appears to have addressed himself directly to Courvoisier,
and to have dwelt with more emphasis than good taste upon the nature of the crime, and the necessity for repentance.
But the chaplain admitted that the solitude of the convict's cell
was more appropriate for serious reflection and profitable ministration than this exciting occasion before a large and public assembly.
So far as I can find, Courvoisier was the last condemned criminal who was thus exhibited to a crowd of morbidly curious spectators.
The atrocity of the murder no doubt attracted extraordinary attention to it.
The crowd outside Newgate on the day of execution has already been described; but there was also a select gathering of distinguished visitors within the jail.
First came the sheriffs, the under-sheriffs, and several aldermen and city officials, then Lord Powerscourt and several other peers of the realm.
Mr. Charles Kean the tragedian was also present,
drawn to this terrible exhibition by the example of his father, the more celebrated Edmund Kean, who had witnessed the execution of Thistlewood
"with a view," as he himself said, "to his professional studies."
But there is little doubt that as executions became more rare they made more impression on the public mind.
Already a strong dislike to the reckless and almost indiscriminate application of the extreme penalty was apparent in all classes,
and the mitigation of the criminal code, for which Romilly had so strenuously labored, was daily more and more of an accomplished fact.
In 1832
capital punishment was abolished for forgery, except in cases of forging or altering wills or powers of attorney to transfer stock.
Nevertheless, after that date no person whatever was executed for this offense.
In the same year capital punishment was further restricted, and ceased to be the legal sentence for coining,
sheep or horse stealing, and stealing in a dwelling-house.
House-breaking, as distinguished from burglary, was similarly exempted in the following year;
next, the offenses of returning from transportation, stealing post-office letters, and sacrilege were no longer punishable with death.
In 1837 Lord John Russell's acts swept away a number of capital offenses, including cutting and maiming, rick-burning,
robbery, burglary, and arson.
Within a couple of years the number of persons sentenced to death in England had fallen from four hundred and thirty-eight in 1837
to fifty-six in 1839.
Gradually the application of capital punishment became more and more restricted, and was soon the penalty for murder alone.
While in London, for instance, in 1829, twenty-four persons had been executed for crimes other than murder,
from 1832 to 1844 not a single person had been executed in the metropolis except for this the gravest crime.
In 1837 the death penalty was practically limited to murder or attempts to murder,
and in 1841 this was accepted as the almost universally established rule.
Seven other crimes, however, were still capital by law, and so continued till the passing of the Criminal Consolidation Acts of 1861.
With the amelioration of the criminal code, other cruel concomitants of execution also disappeared.
In 1832 the dissection of bodies cut down from the gallows, which had been decreed centuries previously, was abolished;
the most recent enactment in force was the 9th George IV. cap. 31, which directed the dissection of all bodies of executed murderers,
the idea being to intensify the dread of capital punishment. That such dread was not universal or deep-seated may be gathered from the fact
that authentic cases were known previous to the first cited act of criminals selling their own bodies to surgeons for dissection.
This dissection was carried out for Newgate prisoners in Surgeons' Hall, adjoining Newgate,
the site of the present Sessions House of the Old Bailey, and the operation was witnessed by students and a number of curious spectators.
Lord Ferrers' body was brought to Surgeons' Hall after execution in his own carriage and six;
after the post mortem had been carried out, the corpse was exposed to view in a first-floor room.
Pennant speaks of Surgeons' Hall as a handsome building, ornamented with Ionic pilasters, and with a double flight of steps to the first floor.
Beneath is a door for the admission of the bodies of murderers and other felons. There were other public dissecting rooms for criminals.
One was attached to Hicks' Hall, the Clerkenwell Sessions House, built out of monies provided by Sir Baptist Hicks, a wealthy alderman of the reign of James I.
Persons were still living in 1855 who had witnessed dissections at Hicks' Hall, and
whom the horrid scene, with the additional effect of some noted criminals hanging on the walls, drove out again sick and faint,
as we have heard some relate, and with pale and terrified features, to get a breath of air.
The dissection of executed criminals was abolished soon after the discovery of the crime of burking,
with the idea that ignominy would no longer attach to an operation which ceased to be compulsory for the most degraded beings;
and that executors or persons having lawful possession of the bodies
of people who had died friendless, would voluntarily surrender them for the advancement of medical science.
Another brutal practice had nearly disappeared about the time of the abolition of dissection. This was the public exhibition of the body,
as was done in the case of Mrs. Phipoe, the murderess, who was executed in front of Newgate in 1798,
and her body publicly exhibited in a place built for the purpose in the Old Bailey.
About this time I find that the bodies of two murderers, Clench and Mackay,
were publicly exposed in a stable in Little Bridge Street, near Apothecaries' Hall,
Surgeons' Hall being let to the lieutenancy of the county for the accommodation of the militia.
In 1811 Williams, who murdered the Marrs in Ratcliffe Highway, having committed suicide in jail to escape hanging,
it was determined that a public exhibition should be made of the body through the neighborhood which had been the scene of the monster's crimes.
A long procession was formed, headed by constables, who cleared the way with their staves.
Then came the newly-formed horse patrol, with drawn cutlasses,
parish officers, peace officers, the high constable of the county of Middlesex on horseback, and then the body of Williams,
extended at full length on an inclined platform
erected on the cart, about four feet high at the head, and gradually sloping towards the horse, giving a full view of the body,
which was dressed in blue trousers and a blue-and-white striped waistcoat, but without a coat, as when found in the cell.
On the left side of the head the fatal mall,
and on the right the ripping chisel, with which the murders had been committed, were exposed to view.
The countenance of Williams was ghastly in the extreme, and the whole had an appearance too horrible for description.
The procession traversed Ratcliffe twice, halting for a quarter of an hour in front of the victims' dwelling,
and was accompanied throughout by "an immense concourse of persons, eager to get a sight of the murderer's remains.
All the shops in the neighborhood were shut, and the windows and tops of the houses were crowded with spectators.
Hanging in chains upon the gibbet which had served for the execution,
or on another specially erected on some commanding spot, had fallen into disuse by 1832.
But there was an attempt to revive it at that date, when the act for dispensing with the dissection of criminals was passed.
A clause was inserted to the effect that
the bodies of all prisoners convicted of murder should either be hung in chains, or buried under the gallows on which they had been executed,
according to the discretion of the court before whom the prisoners might be tried.
The revival of this barbarous practice caused much indignation in certain quarters,
but it was actually tried in two provincial towns, Leicester and Durham.
At the first-named the exhibition nearly created a tumult, and the body was taken down and buried,
but not before the greatest scandal had been caused by the unseemly proceedings of the crowd that flocked to see the sight. A sort of fair was held,
gaming-tables were set up, cards were played under the gibbet, to the disturbance of the public peace and the annoyance of all decent people.
At Jarrow Stake, where the Durham murderer's body was exposed, there were similar scenes, mingled with compassion for the culprit's family,
and a subscription was set on foot for them then and there at the foot of the gibbet.
Later on, after dark, some friends of the deceased stole the body and buried it in the sand, and this was the end of hanging in chains.
After this a law was passed which prescribed that the bodies of all executed murderers should be buried within the walls of the jail.
Although these objectionable practices had disappeared,
there were still many shocking incidents at executions, owing to the bungling and unskilful way in which the operation was performed.
The rope still broke sometimes, although it was not often that the horrid scene seen at Jersey at the beginning of the century was repeated.
There the hangman added his weight to that of the suspended culprit,
and having first pulled him sideways, then got upon his shoulders, so that the rope broke.
To the great surprise of all who witnessed this dreadful scene,
the poor criminal rose straight upon his feet, with the hangman on his shoulders, and immediately loosened the rope with his fingers.
After this the sheriffs sent for another rope, but the spectators interfered, and the man was carried back to jail.
The whole case was referred to the king, and the poor wretch, whose crime had been a military one, was eventually pardoned.
A somewhat similar event happened at Chester not long afterwards; the ropes by which two offenders were turned off broke a few inches from their necks.
They were taken back to jail, and were again brought out in the afternoon, by which time fresh and stronger ropes had been procured,
and the sentence was properly and completely carried out.
Other cases might be quoted,
especially that of William Snow, alias Sketch, who slipped from the gallows at Exeter and fell to the ground.
He soon rose to his feet, and hearing the sorrowful exclamations of the populace, coolly said,
Good people, do not be hurried; I am not, I can wait.
Similar cases were not wanting as regards the executions before Newgate. Others were not less horrible, although there was no failure of apparatus.
Sometimes the condemned man made a hard fight for life.
When Charles White was executed in 1823 for arson, he arranged a handkerchief
in such a way that the executioner found a difficulty in pinioning his hands.
White managed to keep his wrists asunder, and continued to struggle with the officials for some time. Eventually he was pinioned with a cord in the usual manner.
On the scaffold he made a violent attempt to loosen his bonds, and succeeded in getting his hands free.
Then with a strong effort he pushed off the white cap, and tried to liberate his neck from the halter, which by this time had been adjusted.
The hangman summoned assistance, and with help tied the cap over White's face with a handkerchief.
The miserable wretch during the whole of this time was struggling with the most determined violence, to the great horror of the spectators.
Still he resisted.
and having got from the falling drop to the firm part of the platform, he nearly succeeded in tearing the handkerchief from his eyes.
However, the ceremony went forward, and when the signal was given the drop sank.
The wretched man did not fall with it, but jumped on to the platform, and seizing the rope with his hands, tried to avoid strangulation.
The spectacle was horrible;
the convict was half on the platform, half hanging, and the convulsions of his body were appalling.
The crowd vociferously yelled their disapproval, and at length
the executioner forced the struggling criminal from the platform, so that the rope sustained his whole weight.
His face was visible to the whole crowd, and was fearful to behold.
Even now his sufferings were not at an end,
and his death was not compassed until the executioner terminated his sufferings by hanging on to his legs.
When Luigi Buranelli was executed in 1855,
through the improper adjustment of the rope his sufferings were prolonged for five minutes;
his chest heaved, and it was evident that his struggle was a fearful one.
A worse case still was that of William Bousfield, who, when awaiting execution for murder, about the same date,
had attempted to throw himself upon the fire in his condemned cell.
He was in consequence so weak when brought out for execution, that he had to be carried by four men,
two supporting his body and two his legs.
His wretched, abject condition, seated in a chair under the drop, was such as almost to unnerve the executioner Calcraft,
who bad been further upset by a letter threatening to shoot him when he appeared to perform his task.
Calcraft, the moment he had adjusted the cap and rope, ran down the steps, drew the bolt, and disappeared.
For a second or two the body hung motionless, then, with a strength that astonished the attendant officials,
Bousfield slowly drew himself up, and rested with his feet on the right side of the drop.
One of the turnkeys rushed forward and pushed him off.
Again the wretched creature succeeded in obtaining foothold, but this time on the left side of the drop.
Calcraft was forced to return, and he once more pushed Bousfield off,
who for the fourth time regained his foothold. Again he was repelled,
this time Calcraft adding his weight to the body, and the strangulation was completed.
It was stated in evidence before the Commission on Capital Punishment in 1864,
that Calcraft's method of hanging was very rough, much the same as if he had been hanging a dog.
There has never been much science in the system of carrying out the extreme penalty in this country; the "finisher of the law"
has come more by chance than fitness or special education to exercise his loathsome office.
Calcraft, of whom mention has just been made, was by trade a lady's shoemaker,
and before he took to hanging he was employed as a watchman at Reid's brewery in Liquorpond Street.
He was at first engaged as assistant to the executioner Tom Cheshire, but in due course rose to be chief.
He was always known as a mild-mannered man of simple tastes, much given to angling in the New River, and a devoted rabbit fancier.
He was well known in the neighborhood where he resided, and the street gamins cried "Jack Ketch" as he went along the street.
While Calcraft was in office other aspirants to fame appeared in the field.
One was Askern,
who had been a convicted prisoner at York, but who consented to act as hangman when Calcraft was engaged, and no other functionary could be obtained.
It was not always easy to hire a hangman.
There is still extant a curious petition presented to the Treasury by Ralph Griffith, Esq., high sheriff of Flintshire,
which sets forth that the petitioner had been at great expense by sending clerks and agents to Liverpool and Shrewsbury to hire an executioner.
The man to be hanged belonged to Wales, and no Welshman would do the job.
Traveling expenses of these agents cost £15, and another £10 were spent in the hire of a Shropshire man,
who deserted, and was pursued, but without success.
Another man was hired, himself a convict, whose fees for self and wife were twelve guineas.
Then came the cost of the gallows,
4 pounds, 12 shillings; and finally the funeral, cart, coffin, and other petty expenses, amounting to seven pounds 10
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 13: Newgate notorieties, part 1.
In chapter two of the present volume I brought down the record of crime to the second decade of the present century.
I propose now to continue the subject, and to devote a couple of chapters to criminal occurrences of a more recent date,
only premising that as accounts become more voluminous I shall be compelled to deal with fewer cases,
taking in preference those which are typical and invested with peculiar interest. It is somewhat remarkable that a marked change soon comes over the Calendar.
Certain crimes, those against the person especially, diminished gradually. They became less easy or remunerative.
Police protection was better and more effective;
the streets of London were well lighted, the suburbs were more populous and regularly patrolled.
People, too, were getting into the habit of carrying but little cash about them, and no valuables but their watches or personal jewelery.
Street robberies offered fewer inducements to depredators, and evil-doers were compelled to adopt other methods of preying upon their fellows.
This led to a rapid and marked increase in all kinds of fraud;
and prominent in the criminal annals of Newgate in these later years will be found numerous remarkable instances of this class of offense --
forgeries committed systematically, and for long periods, as in the case of Fauntleroy,
to cover enormous defalcations; the fabrication of deeds, wills, and false securities
for the purpose of misappropriating funds or feloniously obtaining cash;
thefts of bullion, bank-notes, specie, and gold-dust, planned with consummate ingenuity,
eluding the keenest vigilance, and carried out with reckless daring;
jewel-boxes cleverly stolen under the very noses of owners or care-takers.
As time passed,
the extraordinary extension of all commercial operations led to many entirely novel and often gigantic financial frauds.
The credulity of investors, the unscrupulous dishonesty of bankers,
the slackness of supervision over wholly irresponsible agents, produced many terrible monetary catastrophes,
and lodged men like Cole, Robson, and Redpath in Newgate.
While the varying conditions of social life thus brought about many changes in the character of offenses against property,
those against the person became more and more limited to the most heinous, or those which menaced or destroyed life.
There was no increase in murder or manslaughter; the number of such crimes remained pretty constant proportionately to population.
Nor did the methods by which they were perpetrated greatly vary from those in times past.
The causes also continued much the same. Passion, revenge, cupidity, sudden ebullitions of homicidal rage,
the cold-blooded, calculating atrocity born of self-interest, were still the irresistible incentives to kill.
The brutal ferocity of the wild beast once aroused, the same means, the same weapons were employed to do the dreadful deed,
the same and happily often futile precautions taken to conceal the crime.
Pegsworth, and Greenacre, and Daniel Good merely reproduced types that had gone before, and that have since reappeared.
Esther Hibner was as inhuman in her ill-usage of the parish apprentice she killed as Martha Brownrigg had been.
Thurtell and Hunt followed in the footsteps of Billings, Wood, and Catherine Hayes.
Courvoisier might have lived a century earlier.
Hocker was found upon the scene of his crime, irresistibly attracted thither, as was Theodore Gardelle.
Now and again there seemed to be a recurrence of a murder epidemic,
as there had been before; as in the year 1849, a year memorable for the Rush murders at Norwich,
the Gleeson Wilson murder at Liverpool, that of the Mannings in London, and of many more.
Men like Mobbs, the miscreant known as "General Haynau" on account of his blood-thirstiness, still murdered their wives;
or like Cannon the chimney-sweeper, who savagely killed the policeman.
A not altogether new crime, however, akin to murder,
although happily never passing beyond dastardly attempts, cropped up in these times, and was often frequently repeated within a short interval.
The present Queen very soon after her accession
became the victim of the most cowardly and unmanly outrages, and the attempted murder of the sovereign by Oxford in 1840
was followed in the very next year by those of Francis and of Bean in two consecutive months,
These crimes had their origin too often in the disordered brains of lunatics at large, like Captain Goode.
Their perpetrators were charged with high treason, but met with merciful clemency as irresponsible beings.
But at various dates treason more distinct and tangible came to the front: attempts to levy war against the State.
The well-known Cato Street conspiracy,
which grew out of disturbed social conditions after the last French war, amidst general distress,
and when the people were beginning to agitate for a larger share of political power, was among the earliest, and to some extent the most desperate, of these.
Its ringleaders, Thistlewood and the rest, were after capture honored by committal as State prisoners to the Tower,
but they came one and all to Newgate for trial at the Old Bailey, and remained there after conviction till they were hanged.
Later on, the Chartists agitated persistently for the concession embraced in the so-called People's Charter, many of which
are by this time actually, and by more legitimate efforts, engrafted upon our Constitution.
But the Chartists sought their ends by riot and rebellion, and gained only imprisonment for their pains.
Some five hundred in all were arrested, but as only three of these were lodged in Newgate, I shall not recur to them in my narrative.
The Cato Street conspiracy would have been simply ridiculous but for the recklessness of the desperadoes who planned it.
But they proceeded in all seriousness, and would have shrunk from no outrage or atrocity in furtherance of their foolhardy enterprise.
The massacre of the whole of the Cabinet Ministers at one stroke was to be followed by an attack
upon "the old man and the old woman," as they styled the Mansion House and the Bank of England.
At the former the "Provisional Government" was to be established,
which under Thistlewood as dictator was to rule the nation, by first handing over its capital to fire and pillage.
This Thistlewood had seen many vicissitudes throughout his strange, adventurous career. The son of a respectable Lincolnshire farmer,
he became a militia officer, and married a woman with £10,000, in which, however, she had only a life interest.
She died early, and Thistlewood, left to his own resources,
followed the profession of arms, first in the British service, and then in that of the French revolutionary Government.
It was during this period that he was said to have imbibed his revolutionary ideas.
Returning to England,
he found himself rich in a small landed property, which he presently sold to a man who became bankrupt before he had paid over the purchase money.
After this he tried farming, but failed.
He married again and came to London, where he soon became notorious as a reckless gambler and a politician holding the most extreme views.
In this way he formed the acquaintance of Watson and others, with whom he was arraigned for treasonable practices, and imprisoned.
On his release he sent a challenge to Lord Sidmouth, the Home Secretary, and was again arrested and imprisoned.
On his second release, goaded by his fancied wrongs, he began to plot a dark and dreadful revenge,
and thus the conspiracy in which he was the prime mover took shape, and came to a head.
The Government obtained early and full information of the nefarious scheme.
One of the conspirators, by name Edwards,
made a voluntary confession to Sir Herbert Taylor one morning at Windsor; after which Thistlewood and his accomplices were closely watched,
and measures taken to arrest them when their plans were so far developed that no doubt could remain as to their guilt.
The day appointed for the murder and rising actually arrived before the authorities interfered.
It was the day on which Lord Harrowby was to entertain his colleagues at dinner in Grosvenor Square.
The occasion was considered excellent by the conspirators for disposal of the whole Cabinet at one blow,
and it was arranged that one of their number should knock at Lord Harrowby's door on the pretense of leaving a parcel,
and that when it was opened the whole band should rush in.
While a few secured the servants, the rest were to fall upon Lord Harrowby and his guests.
Hand-grenades were to be thrown into the dining-room, and during the noise and confusion the assassination of the ministers was to be completed,
the heads of Lord Castlereagh and Lord Sidmouth being carried away in a bag.
Lord Harrowby's dinner-party was postponed, but the conspirators knew nothing of it,
and those who watched his house were further encouraged in their mistake by the arrival of many carriages,
bound, as it happened, to the Archbishop of York's.
Meanwhile the main body remained at their headquarters, a ruined stable in Cato Street,
Edgeware Road, completing their dispositions for assuming supreme power after the blow had been struck.
Here they were surprised by the police, headed by a magistrate, and supported by a strong detachment of Her Majesty's Guards.
The police were the first to arrive on the spot, the Guards having entered the street at the wrong end.
The conspirators were in a loft, approached by a ladder and a trap-door, access through which could only be obtained one by one.
The first constable who entered Thistlewood ran through the body with a sword, but others quickly followed,
the lights were extinguished, and a desperate conflict ensued.
The Guards, headed by Lord Adolphus Fitz Clarence, now reinforced the police, and the conspirators gave way.
Nine of the latter were captured, with all the war material, cutlasses, pistols, hand-grenades, and ammunition.
Thistlewood and fourteen more succeeded for the moment in making their escape, but most of them were subsequently taken.
He was in bed with his breeches on (in the pockets of which were found a number of cartridges), the black belt he had worn at Cato Street,
and a military sash.
The trial of the conspirators came on some six weeks later, at the Old Bailey.
Thistlewood made a long and rambling defense, the chief features of which were abuse of Lord Sidmouth, and the vilification of the informer Edwards.
Several of the other prisoners took the same line as regards Edwards,
and there seems to have been good reason for supposing that he was a greater villain than any of those arraigned.
He had been in a state of abject misery, and when he first joined "the reformers," as the Cato Street conspirators called themselves,
he had neither a bed to lie upon nor a coat to his back.
His sudden access to means unlimited was no doubt due to the profitable role he soon adopted of Government informer and spy,
and it is pretty certain that for some time he served both sides;
on the one inveigling silly enthusiasts to join in the plot, and denouncing them on the other.
The employment of Edwards, and the manner in which the conspirators were allowed to commit themselves further and further before the law was set in motion against them,
were not altogether creditable to the Government.
It was asserted, not without foundation, at these trials, that Edwards repeatedly incited the associates he was betraying
to commit outrage, to set fire to houses, throw hand-grenades into the carriages of ministers;
that he was, to use Thistlewood's words, "a contriver, instigator, and entrapper."
The Government were probably not proud of their agent, for Edwards, after the conviction had been assured, went abroad to enjoy, it was said,
an ample pension, so long as he did not return to England.
Five of the conspirators, Thistlewood, Ings, Brunt, Davidson, and Tidd, were sentenced to death,
and suffered in the usual way in front of Newgate, with the additional penalty of decapitation, as traitors, after they had been hanged.
A crowd as great as any known collected in the Old Bailey to see the ceremony, about which there were some peculiar features worth recording.
The reckless demeanor of all the convicts except Davidson was most marked. Thistlewood and Ings sucked oranges on the scaffold;
they with Brunt and Tidd scorned the ordinary's ministrations,
but Ings said he hoped God would be more merciful to him than men had been.
Ings was especially defiant. He sought to cheer Davidson, who seemed affected, crying out,
Come, old cock-of-wax, it will soon be over.
As the executioner fastened the noose, he nodded to a friend he saw in the crowd;
and catching sight of the coffins ranged around the gallows, he smiled at the show with contemptuous indifference.
He roared out snatches of a song about Death or Liberty, and just before he was turned off,
yelled out three cheers to the populace whom he faced.
He told the executioner to "do it tidy," to pull it tight, and was in a state of hysterical exaltation up to the very last.
Davidson, who was the only one who seemed to realize his awful situation, listened patiently and with thankfulness to the chaplain,
and died in a manner strongly contrasting with that of his fellows.
After the five bodies had hung for half-an-hour, a man in a mask came forward to complete the sentence.
Contemporary reports state that from the skillful manner in which he performed the decapitation,
he was generally supposed to be a surgeon.
Be this as it may, the weapon used was only an ordinary axe, which rather indicates that force, not skill, was employed.
This axe is still in existence, and is preserved at Newgate with various other unpleasant curiosities,
but is only an ordinary commonplace tool.
These were the last executions for high treason, but not the last prisoners by many who passed through Newgate charged with sedition.
Attacks upon the sovereign, as I have said, became more common after the accession of the young Queen Victoria in 1838.
It was a form of high treason not unknown in earlier reigns. In 1786 a mad woman, Margaret Nicholson,
tried to stab George III. as he was alighting from his carriage at the gate of St. James's Palace.
She was seized before she could do any mischief,
and eventually lodged in Bethlehem Hospital, where she died after forty years' detention, at the advanced age of one hundred.
Again, a soldier, by name Hatfield, who had been wounded in the head, and discharged from the army for unsoundness of mind,
fired a pistol at George III. from the pit of Drury Lane theatre in 1800.
William IV. was also the victim of a murderous outrage on Ascot race-course in 1832,
when John Collins, "a person in the garb of a sailor, of wretched appearance, and having a wooden leg,"
threw a stone at the king, which hit him on the forehead, but did no serious injury.
Collins, when charged, pleaded that he had lost his leg in action, that he had petitioned without success for a pension,
and that, as he was starving, he had resolved on this desperate deed,
feeling, as he said, that he might as well be shot or hanged as remain in such a state.
He was eventually sentenced to death, but the plea of lunacy was allowed, and he was confined for life.
None of the foregoing attempts were, however, so dastardly or determined as that made by Oxford upon our present gracious Queen
two years after she ascended the throne.
The cowardly crime was probably encouraged by the fearless and confiding manner in which the Queen,
secure as it seemed in the affections of her loyal people, freely appeared in public.
Oxford, who was only nineteen at the time his offense was committed, had been born at Birmingham,
but he came as a lad to London, and took service as a pot-boy to a publican.
From this he was promoted to barman, and as such had charge of the business in various public-houses.
He left his last situation in April 1840, and established himself in lodgings in Lambeth,
after which he devoted himself to pistol practice in shooting-galleries, sometimes in Leicester Square,
sometimes in the Strand, or the West End.
His acquaintances often asked his object in this, but he kept his own counsel till the 10th June.
On that day Oxford was on the watch at Buckingham Palace.
He saw Prince Albert return there from a visit to Woolwich, and then passed on to Constitution Hill,
where he waited till four p.m., the time at which the Queen and Prince Consort usually took an afternoon drive.
About six p.m. the royal carriage, a low open vehicle drawn by four horses, ridden by postilions, left the palace.
Oxford, who had been pacing backwards and forwards with his hands under the lapels of his coat, saw the carriage approach.
He was on the right or north side of the road. Prince Albert occupied the same side of the carriage, the Queen the left.
As the carriage came up to him Oxford turned, put his hand into his breast, drew a pistol, and fired at the Queen.
The shot missed, and as the carriage passed on, Oxford drew a second pistol and fired again.
The Queen saw this second movement, and stooped to avoid the shot;
the Prince too rose to shield her with his person. Again, providentially, the bullet went wide of the mark,
and the royal party drove back to Clarence House, the Queen being anxious to give the first news of the outrage and of her safety to her mother,
the Duchess of Kent.
Meanwhile the pistol-shots had attracted the attention of the bystanders, of whom there was a fair collection, as usual, waiting to see the Queen pass.
Oxford was seized by a person named Lowe, who was at first mistaken for the assailant.
But Oxford at once assumed the responsibility for his crime, saying, "It was I. I did it. I'll give myself up.
There is no occasion to use violence. I will go with you.
He was taken into custody, and removed first to a police cell, thence committed to Newgate, after he had been examined before the Privy Council.
Oxford expressed little anxiety or concern.
He asked more than once whether the Queen was hurt, and acknowledged that the pistols were loaded with ball.
A craze for notoriety, to be achieved at any cost, was the one absorbing idea in young Oxford's disordered brain.
After his arrest he thought only of the excitement his attempt had raised, nothing of its atrocity,
or of the fatal consequences which might have ensued.
When brought to trial he hardly realized his position,
but gazed with complacency around the crowded court, and eagerly inquired what persons of distinction were present.
He smiled continually, and when the indictment was read, burst into loud and discordant fits of laughter.
These antics may have been assumed to bear out the plea of insanity set up in his defense,
but that there was madness in his family, and that he himself was of unsound mind, could not be well denied.
His father, it was proved in evidence, had been at times quite mad; and Oxford's mental state might be inferred from his own proceedings.
Among his papers was found a curious document, purporting to be the rules of an association called
"Young England," which Oxford had evolved out of his own inflated self-conceit, and which had never any real corporeal existence.
"Young England" was a secret society, with no aim or object.
Its sworn members, known only to Oxford, and all of them mere shadows,
were bound to provide themselves with sword, rifle, dagger, and a pair of pistols;
to wear a black crape mask, to obey punctually the orders of their commander-in-chief,
and to assume any disguise, if required to go into the country on the business of the association.
The officers of the society were to be known only by "factitious names."
Thus, among the presidents were those of Gowrie, Justinian, Aloman, Colsman, Kenneth, and Godfrey;
Hannibal and Ethelred were on the council; Anthony, Augustus, and Frederic were among the generals;
Louis and Amadeus among the captains; and Hercules, Neptune, and Mars among the lieutenants of the association.
The various grades were distinguished by cockades and bows of different colors.
The society was supposed to meet regularly, and its proceedings, together with the speeches made, were duly recorded.
With Oxford's other papers were found letters from the secretary, written as it seemed by Oxford to himself, after the manner of Mr. Toots,
all of which declared their approval of the commander-in-chief.
One expressed pleasure that Oxford improved so much in speaking, and declared that his (Oxford's) speech the last time "was beautiful."
This letter went on to say that a new member had been introduced by Lt. Mars, "a fine, tall, gentlemanly young man,
and it is said that he is a military officer, but his name has not yet transpired.
Soon after he was introduced we were alarmed by a violent knocking at the door;
in an instant our faces were covered, we cocked our pistols, and with drawn swords stood waiting to receive the enemy.
While one stood over the fire with the papers, another stood with lighted torch to fire the house.
We then sent the old woman to open the door, and it proved to be some little boys who had knocked and ran away.
Another letter directed Oxford to attend an extraordinary meeting of "Young England"
in consequence of having received some information of an important nature from Hanover.
You must attend; and if your master will not give you leave, you must come in defiance of him.
No serious importance could be attached to these, the manifest inventions of a disordered intellect.
The whole of the evidence pointed so strongly towards insanity, that the jury brought in a verdict of acquittal on that ground,
and Oxford was ordered to be detained during Her Majesty's pleasure.
He went from Newgate first to Bethlehem, from which he was removed to Broadmoor on the opening of the great criminal lunatic asylum at that place.
He was released from Broadmoor in 1878, and went abroad.
Within a couple of years a second attempt to assassinate the Queen was perpetrated in nearly the same spot, by a man named John Francis,
who was arrested in the very act, just as he had fired one shot.
His motives for thus imitating the dastardly crime of Oxford are shrouded in obscurity.
He could not plead insanity like his predecessor, and no attempt was made at his trial to prove him of unsound mind.
he would be in some way provided for, he having been for some time previously in abject circumstances.
The deed was long premeditated, and would have been executed a day earlier had not his courage failed him at the last moment.
A youth named Pearson had seen him present a pistol at the Queen's carriage,
but draw it back again, exclaiming presently, "I wish I had done it."
Pearson weakly allowed Francis to go off without securing his apprehension, but later he gave full information.
The Queen was apprised of the danger, and begged not to go abroad;
but she declared she would not remain a prisoner in her own palace, and next day drove out as usual in an open barouche.
Nothing happened till Her Majesty returned to Buckingham Palace about six p.m., when, on descending Constitution Hill,
with an equerry riding close on each side of her carriage, a man who had been leaning against the palace garden wall suddenly advanced,
leveled a pistol at the Queen, and fired. He was so close to the carriage that the smoke of his pistol enveloped the face of Colonel Wylde,
one of the equerries. The Queen was untouched, and at first, it is said, hardly realized the danger she had escaped.
Francis had already been seized by a policeman named Trounce, who saw his movement with the pistol, but too late to prevent its discharge.
The prisoner was conveyed without delay to the Home Office, and there examined by the Privy Council, which had been hastily summoned for the purpose.
On searching him the pistol was found in his pocket, the barrel still warm; also some loose powder and a bullet.
There was some doubt as to whether the pistol when fired was actually loaded with ball, but the jury brought in a verdict of guilty
of the criminal intent to kill.
Francis was sentenced to be hanged, decapitated, and quartered,
the old traitor's doom, but was spared, and subsequently transported for life.
The enthusiasm of the people at the Queen's escape was uproarious, and her drive next day was one long triumphal progress.
At the Italian Opera in the evening the audience, on the Queen's appearance, greeted her with loud cheers, and called for the national anthem.
This was in May 1842.
Undeterred by the well-merited punishment which had overtaken Francis,
a third miscreant made a similar but far less serious attempt in the month of July following.
a deformed lad among the crowd was seen to present a pistol at Her Majesty's carriage,
in the Mall, about half-way between Buckingham and St. James's Palaces.
Only one person saw the movement, a lad named Dasset, who at once collared the cripple, and taking him up to two policemen,
The policemen treated the matter as a hoax, and allowed the culprit to make off.
Later on, however, Dasset was himself seized and interrogated,
and on his information handbills were circulated, giving the exact description of the deformed youth, who had a hump-back,
and a long, sickly, pale face, with light hair;
his nose was marked with a scar or black patch, and he was altogether of a dirty appearance.
It happened that a lad named Bean had absconded from his father's home some weeks before,
whose description, as given by his father to the police,
A visit to the father's residence was followed by the arrest of the son, who had by this time returned.
This son, John William Bean, was fully identified by Dasset, and presently examined by the Privy Council.
He was eventually charged with a misdemeanor, the capital charge having been abandoned, and committed for trial.
Much the same motives of seeking notoriety seem to have impelled Bean, who was perfectly sane, to his rash act;
but it was proved that the pistol was not loaded with ball,
and he was only convicted of an attempt "to harass, vex, and grieve the sovereign.
Lord Abinger sentenced him to eighteen months' imprisonment in Newgate,
but the place of durance was changed, to meet the existing law, to Millbank Penitentiary.
I shall mention briefly one more case, in which, however, there was no murderous intent, before I pass on to other crimes.
On June 1850 the Queen was once more subjected to cowardly outrage, the offender being a Mr. Pate, a gentleman by birth,
who had borne the Queen's commission, first as cornet, and then lieutenant, in the 10th Hussars.
Pate was said to be an eccentric person, given to strange acts and antics, such as mixing whiskey and camphor with his morning bath-water,
and walking for choice through prickly gorse bushes.
He always kept the blinds down at his chambers in Jermyn Street; and as the St. James's clock chimed quarter-past three,
invariably went out in a cab, for which he always paid the same fare,
nine shillings, all in shillings, and no other coin.
But this was not sufficient to constitute lunacy, nor was his plea of "momentary uncontrollable impulse"
deemed valid as any palliation of his offense.
That offense was a brutal assault upon Her Majesty, whom he struck in the face with a small stick just as she was leaving Cambridge House.
The blow crushed the bonnet and bruised the forehead of the Queen, who was happily not otherwise injured.
Pate was found guilty, and sentenced to seven years' transportation, the judge, Baron Alderson, abstaining from inflicting the penalty of whipping,
which was authorized by a recent act, on account of Mr. Pate's family and position in life.
frauds indicating great boldness, extensive design, and ingenuity became more prevalent.
The increase of bank forgeries, and its cause, I referred to in a previous chapter.
At one session of the Old Bailey, in 1821, no less than thirty-five true bills were found for passing forged notes.
But there were other notorious cases of forgery.
That of Fauntleroy the banker, in 1824,
caused much excitement at the time on account of the magnitude of the fraud, and the seeming probity of the culprit.
Mr. Fauntleroy was a member of a banking firm, which his father had established in conjunction with a gentleman of the name of Marsh, and others.
He had entered the house as clerk in 1800;
in 1807, and when only twenty-two, he succeeded to his father's share in the business.
According to Fauntleroy's own case, he found at once that the firm was heavily involved,
through advances made to various builders, and that it could only maintain its credit by wholesale discounting.
Its embarrassments were greatly increased by the bankruptcy of two of its clients in the building trade,
and the bank became liable for a sum of £170,000.
New liabilities were incurred to the extent of £100,000 by more failures, and in 1819,
by the death of one of the partners, a large sum in cash had to be withdrawn from the bank to pay his heirs.
"During these numerous and trying difficulties" -- it is Mr. Fauntleroy who speaks --
the house was nearly without resources, and the whole burthen of management falling on me, I sought resources where I could;
in other words, he forged powers of attorney, and proceeded to realize securities lodged in his bank under various names.
Among the prisoner's private papers, one was found giving full details of the stock he had feloniously sold out,
the sum total amounting to some £170,000, with a declaration in his own handwriting to the following effect.
In order to keep up the credit of our house, I have forged powers of attorney for the above sums and parties,
and sold out to the amount here stated, and without the knowledge of my partners.
I kept up the payments of the dividends, but made no entries of such payments in my books.
The bank began first to refuse our acceptances, and to destroy the credit of our house; the bank shall smart for it.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 14: Newgate notorieties, part 1
Many stories were in circulation at the time of Fauntleroy's trial with regard to his forgeries. It was said that he had by means of them
sold out so large an amount of stock, that he paid £16,000 a year in dividends to escape detection.
Once he ran a narrow risk of being found out.
A lady in the country, who had £13,000 in the stocks, desired her London agent to sell them out.
He went to the bank, and found that no stocks stood in her name. He called at once upon Fauntleroy, his client's bankers, for an explanation,
and was told by Mr. Fauntleroy that the lady had desired him to sell out, "which I have done," added the fraudulent banker, "and here are the proceeds,"
whereupon he produced exchequer bills to the amount.
On another occasion the banker forged a gentleman's name while the latter was sitting with him in his private room,
and took the instrument out to a clerk with the ink not dry.
It must be added that the Bank of England, on discovering the forgeries,
replaced the stock in the names of the original holders, who might otherwise have been completely ruined.
A newspaper report of the time describes Fauntleroy as a well-made man of middle stature.
His hair, though gray, was thick, and lay smooth over his forehead.
His countenance had an expression of most subdued resignation.
The impression which his appearance altogether was calculated to make was that of the profoundest commiseration.
The crime, long carried on without detection, was first discovered in 1820,
when it was found that a sum of £10,000, standing in the name of three trustees, of whom Fauntleroy was one,
had been sold out under a forged power of attorney.
Further investigations brought other similar frauds to light,
and fixed the whole sum misappropriated at £170,000, the first forgery dating back to 1814.
A run upon the bank immediately followed, which was only met by a suspension of payment and the closing of its doors.
Meanwhile public gossip was busy with Fauntleroy's name,
and it was openly stated in the press and in conversation that the proceeds of these frauds had been squandered in chambering, gambling, and debauchery.
Fauntleroy was scouted as a licentious libertine, a deep and determined gamester, a spendthrift whose extravagance knew no bounds.
The veil was lifted from his private life, and he was accused of persistent immorality.
In his defense
he sought to rebut these charges, which indeed were never clearly made out, and it is pretty certain that his own account of the causes which led him into dishonesty
was substantially true
He called many witnesses, seventeen in all, to speak of him as they had found him; and these, all respectable city merchants and business men,
declared that they had hitherto formed a high opinion of his honor, integrity, and goodness of disposition,
deeming him the last person capable of a dishonorable action.
These arguments availed little with the jury, who after a short deliberation found Fauntleroy guilty, and he was sentenced to death.
Every endeavor was used, however, to obtain a commutation of sentence. His case was twice argued before the judges on points of law,
but the result in both cases was unfavorable.
Appeals were made to the Home Secretary, and all possible political interest brought to bear, but without success.
Fauntleroy meanwhile lay in Newgate, not herded with other condemned prisoners, as the custom was,
but in a separate chamber, that belonging to one of the warders of the jail.
I find in the chaplain's journal, under date 1824, various entries relative to this prisoner.
Visited Mr. Fauntleroy. My application for books for him not having been attended, I had no prayer-book to give him.
Visited Mr. Fauntleroy. The sheriffs have very kindly permitted him to remain in the turnkey's room where he was originally placed; nor can I omit expressing a hope
that this may prove the beginning of a better system of confinement, and that every description of persons who may be unfortunately under sentence of death
will no longer be herded indiscriminately together.
The kindliness of the city authorities to Fauntleroy was not limited to the assignment of a separate place of durance.
As I have already said, they took the chaplain seriously to task for the bad taste shown in the condemned sermon preached before Fauntleroy.
This was on the text,
Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall," and was full of the most pointed allusions to the culprit.
Fauntleroy constantly groaned aloud while the sermon proceeded, and contemporary reports declared
that he appeared to feel deeply the force of the reverend gentleman's observations, especially when the chaplain spoke of
the great magnitude of our erring brother's offense, one of the most dangerous description in a trading community.
The sermon ended with an appeal to the dying man, exhorting him to penitence.
This "personality," and it can be called by no other name, is carefully excluded from prison pulpit utterances on the eve of an execution.
A very curious and, in its way, amusing circumstance in connection with this case was the offer of a certain Italian,
Edmund Angelini, to take Fauntleroy's place.
Angelini wrote to the Lord Mayor to this effect,
urging that Fauntleroy was a father, a citizen: "his life is useful, mine a burthen, to the State."
He was summoned to the Mansion House, where he repeated his request, crying, "Accordez moi cette grâce," with much urgency.
There were doubts of his sanity.
He wrote afterwards to the effect that the moment he had offered himself, an unknown assassin came to aim a blow at him.
Let this monster give his name; I am ready to fight him. I am still determined to put myself in the place of Mr. Fauntleroy.
If the law of this country can receive such a sacrifice, my death will render to heaven an innocent man, and to earth a repentant sinner.
Fauntleroy was not entirely dependent upon the ordinary for ghostly counsel in his extremity.
He was also attended by the Rev. Mr. Springett and the indefatigable Mr. Baker, whose name has already been mentioned.
When led out on the morning of his execution, these two last-named gentlemen each took hold of one of his arms, and so accompanied him to the scaffold.
The concourse in front of Newgate was enormous, but much sympathy was evinced for this unfortunate victim to human weakness and ruthless laws.
A report was, moreover, widely circulated, and the impression long prevailed, that he actually escaped death.
It was said that strangulation had been prevented by the insertion of a silver tube in his wind-pipe,
and that after hanging for the regulated time he was taken down and easily restored to consciousness.
Afterwards, according to the common rumor, he went abroad and lived there for many years; but the story is not only wholly unsubstantiated,
but there is good evidence to show that the body after execution was handed over to his friends and interred privately.
Some years were still to elapse before capital punishment ceased to be the penalty for forgery, and in the interval
several persons were sentenced to or suffered death for this crime.
There were two notable capital convictions for forgery in 1828.
One was that of Captain Montgomery, who assumed the aliases of Colonel Wallace and Colonel Morgan.
His offense was uttering forged notes, and there was strong suspicion that he had long subsisted entirely by this fraud.
The act for which he was taken into custody was the payment of a forged ten-pound note for half-a-dozen silver spoons.
Montgomery was an adept at forgery. He had gone wrong early. Although born of respectable parents, and gazetted to a commission in the army,
he soon left the service and betook himself to dishonest ways.
His first forgery was the marvelous imitation of the signature of the Hon. Mr. Neville, M.P., who wrote an extremely cramped and curious hand.
He was not prosecuted for this fraud on account of the respectability of his family, and soon after this escape
he came to London, where he practiced as a professional swindler and cheat.
For a long time justice did not overtake him for any criminal offense, but he was frequently in Newgate and in the King's Bench for debt.
After three years' confinement in the latter prison he passed himself off as his brother, Colonel Montgomery,
a distinguished officer, and would have married an heiress had not the imposture been discovered in time.
He then took to forging bank-notes, and was arrested as I have described above.
Montgomery was duly sentenced to death, but he preferred suicide to the gallows. After sentence his demeanor was serious yet firm.
The night previous to that fixed for his execution he wrote several letters, one of them being to Edward Gibbon Wakefield, a fellow-prisoner,
and listened attentively to the ordinary, who read him the well-known address written and delivered by Dr. Dodd previous to his own execution for forgery.
But next morning he was found dead in his cell.
In one corner after much search a phial was found labeled "Prussic acid,"
which it was asserted he had been in the habit of carrying about his person ever since he had taken to passing forged notes, as an antidote against disgrace.
This phial he had managed to retain in his possession in spite of the frequent searches to which he was subjected in Newgate.
The second conviction for forgery in 1828 was that of the Quaker Joseph Hunton, a man of previously the highest repute in the city of London.
He had prospered in early life, was a slop-seller on a large scale at Bury St. Edmunds, and a sugar-baker in the metropolis.
He married a lady also belonging to the Society of Friends, who brought him a large fortune, which, and his own money, he put into a city firm,
that of Dickson and Co.
He soon, however, became deeply involved in Stock Exchange speculations,
and losing heavily, to meet the claims upon him he put out a number of forged bills of exchange or acceptances,
to which the signature of one Wilkins of Abingdon was found to be forged.
Hunton tried to fly the country on the detection of the fraud, but was arrested at Plymouth just as he was on the point of leaving England in the New York packet.
He had gone on board in his Quaker dress, but when captured was found in a light-green frock,
a pair of light gray pantaloons, a black stock and a foraging cap.
Hunton was put upon his trial at the Old Bailey, and in due course sentenced to death.
His defense was that the forged acceptances would have been met on coming to maturity, and that he had no real desire to defraud.
Hunton accepted his sentence with great resignation, although he protested against the inhumanity of the laws which condemned him to death.
On entering Newgate he said,
I wish after this day to have communication with nobody; let me take leave of my wife, and family, and friends. I have already suffered an execution;
my heart has undergone that horrible penalty.
He was, however, visited by and received his wife, and several members of the Society of Friends.
Two elders of the meeting sat up with him in the press yard the whole of the night previous to execution, and a third,
Mr. Sparks Moline, came to attend him to the scaffold.
He met his death with unshaken firmness, only entreating that a certain blue handkerchief,
to which he seemed fondly attached, should be used to bandage his eyes, which request was readily granted.
Hunton's execution no doubt aroused public attention to the cruelty and futility of the capital law against forgery.
A society which had already been started against capital punishment
devoted its efforts first to a mitigation of the forgery statute, but could not immediately accomplish much.
In 1829 the gallows claimed two more victims for this offense.
One was Richard Gifford, a well-educated youth who had been at Christ's Hospital, and afterwards in the National Debt Office.
Unfortunately he took to drink, lost his appointment, and fell from bad to worse.
Suddenly, after being at the lowest depths, he emerged, and was found by his friends living in comfort in the Waterloo Road.
His funds, which he pretended came to him with a rich wife, were really the proceeds of frauds upon the Bank of England.
He forged the names of people who held stock on the Bank books, and got the value of the stock;
he also forged dividend receipts and got the dividends. He was only six-and-twenty when he was hanged.
The other and the last criminal executed for forgery in this country was one Maynard, who was convicted of a fraud upon the Custom House.
In conjunction with two others, one of whom was a clerk in the Custom House,
and had access to the official records, he forged a warrant for one thousand nine-hundred seventy-three pounds and was paid the money by the comptroller general.
Maynard was convicted of uttering the forged document, Jones of being an accessory; the third prisoner was acquitted.
Maynard was the only one who suffered death.
This was on the last day of 1829. In the following session Sir Robert Peel brought in a bill to consolidate the acts relating to forgery.
Upon the third reading of this bill Sir James Macintosh moved as an amendment that capital punishment should be abolished for all crimes of forgery,
except the forgery of wills and powers of attorney.
This amendment was strongly supported outside the House, and a petition in favor of its passing was presented,
signed by more than a thousand members of banking firms.
Macintosh's amendment was carried in the Commons, but the new law did not pass the Lords, who re-enacted the capital penalty.
Still no sentence of death was carried out for the offense, and in 1832
the Attorney-General introduced a bill to abolish capital punishment entirely for forgery.
It passed the Commons, but opposition was again encountered in the Lords.
This time they sent back the bill, re-enacting only the two penalties for will forging and the forging of powers of attorney;
in other words, they had advanced in 1832 to the point at which the Lower House had arrived in 1830.
There were at the moment in Newgate six convicts sentenced to death for forging wills.
The question was whether the Government would dare to take their lives at the bidding of the House of Lords,
and in defiance of the vote of the assembly which more accurately represented public opinion. It was indeed announced that their fate was sealed;
but Mr. Joseph Hume pressed the Government hard, and obtained an assurance that the men should not be executed.
The new Forgery Act with the Lords' amendment passed into law, but the latter proved perfectly harmless,
and no person ever after suffered death for any variety of this crime.
I will include in this part of the present chapter almost one of the last instances of a crime which in time past
had invariably been visited with the death penalty, and which was of a distinctly fraudulent nature.
The abduction of Miss Turner by the brothers Wakefield bore a strong resemblance to the carrying off and forcible marrying of heiresses as already described.
Miss Turner was a school-girl of barely fifteen,
only child of a gentleman of large property in Cheshire, of which county he was actually high sheriff at the time of his daughter's abduction.
The elder brother,
Edward Gibbon Wakefield, the prime mover in the abduction, was a barrister, not exactly briefless, but without a large practice.
He had, it was said, a good private income, and was already a widower with two children at the time of his committing the offense for which he was subsequently tried.
He had eloped with his first wife from school.
While on a visit to Macclesfield he heard by chance of Miss Turner, and that she would inherit all her father's possessions.
He thereupon conceived an idea of carrying her off and marrying her willy nilly at Gretna Green.
The two brothers started at once for Liverpool, where Miss Turner was at school with a Mrs. Daulby.
At Manchester, en route, a traveling carriage was purchased, which was driven up to Mrs. Daulby's door at eight in the morning,
and a servant hurriedly alighted from it, bearing a letter for Miss Turner.
This purported to be from the medical attendant of Mr. Turner, written at Shrigley, Mr. Turner's place of residence;
and it stated that Mrs. Turner had been stricken with paralysis.
She was not in immediate danger, but she wished to see her daughter, "as it was possible she might soon become incapable of recognizing any one."
Miss Turner, greatly agitated, accompanied the messenger who had brought this news, a disguised servant of Wakefield's,
who had plausibly explained that he had only recently been engaged at Shrigley.
The road taken was via Manchester, where the servant said a Dr. Hull was to be picked up to go on with them to Shrigley.
At Manchester, however, the carriage stopped at the Albion Hotel.
Miss Turner was shown into a private room, where Mr. Wakefield soon presented himself.
Miss Turner, not knowing him, would have left the room, but he said he came from her father, and she remained.
Wakefield, in reply to her inquiries, satisfied her that her mother was well, and that the real reason for summoning her from school
was the state of her father's affairs.
Mr. Turner was on the verge of bankruptcy. He was at that moment at Kendal, and wished her to join him there at once.
Miss Turner consented to go on, and they traveled night and day towards the north.
But at Kendal there was no Mr. Turner, and, to allay Miss Turner's growing anxiety,
Wakefield found it necessary to become more explicit regarding her father's affairs.
He now pretended that Mr. Turner was also on his way to the border, pursued by sheriffs' officers.
The fact was, Wakefield went on to say, an uncle of his had advanced Mr. Turner £60,000, which had temporarily staved off ruin.
But another bank had since failed, and nothing could save Mr. Turner but the transfer of some property to Miss Turner, and its settlement on her,
so that it might become the exclusive property of her husband, "whoever he might be."
Wakefield added that it had been suggested he should marry Miss Turner, but that he had laughed at the idea.
Wakefield's uncle took the matter more seriously, and declared that unless the marriage came off Mr. Turner must be sold up.
Miss Turner, thus pressed, consented to go on to Gretna Green.
Passing through Carlisle, she was told that Mr. Turner was in the town, but could not show himself.
Nothing could release him from his trouble but the arrival of the marriage certificate from Gretna Green.
Filial affection rose superior to all scruples, and Miss Turner, having crossed the border, was married to Wakefield
by the blacksmith in the usual way.
Returning to Carlisle, she now heard that her father had been set free, and had gone home to Shrigley, whither they were to follow him.
They set out, but at Leeds Wakefield found himself called suddenly to Paris;
the other brother was accordingly sent on a pretended mission to Shrigley to bring Mr. Turner on to London, whither Wakefield and Miss Turner also proceeded.
On arrival, Wakefield pretended that they had missed Mr. Turner, and must follow him over to France.
The strangely-married couple thereupon pressed on to Dover, and crossed over to Calais.
The fact of the abduction did not transpire for some days.
Then Mrs. Daulby learnt that Miss Turner had not arrived at Shrigley, but that she had gone to Manchester.
Friends went in pursuit and traced her to Huddersfield and further north.
The terror and dismay of her parents were soon intensified by the receipt of a letter from Wakefield, at Carlisle, announcing the marriage.
Mr. Turner at once set off for London, where he sought the assistance of the police,
and presently ascertained that Wakefield had gone to the Continent with his involuntary bride.
An uncle of Miss Wakefield's, accompanied by his solicitor and a Bow Street runner, at once went in pursuit.
Meanwhile, a second letter turned up from Wakefield at Calais, in which he assured Mrs. Turner that Miss Turner was fondly attached to him,
and went on to say, "I do assure you, madam, that it shall be the anxious endeavor of my life to promote her happiness by every means in my power."
The game, however, was nearly up. Miss Turner was met by her uncle on Calais pier as she was walking with Wakefield.
The uncle claimed her. The husband resisted.
Monsieur le Maire was appealed to, and decided to leave it to the young lady, who at once abandoned Wakefield.
As he still urged his rights over his wife, Miss Turner cried out in protest, "No, no, I am not his wife;
he carried me away by fraud and stratagem, and forced me to accompany him to Gretna Green
By the same forcible means I was compelled to quit England, and to trust myself to the protection of this person,
whom I never saw until I was taken from Liverpool, and never want to see again.
On this Wakefield gave in.
He surrendered the bride who had never been a wife, and she returned to England with her friends, while Wakefield went on alone to Paris.
Mr. William Wakefield was arrested at Dover, conveyed to Chester, and committed to Lancaster Jail for trial at the next assizes,
when indictments were preferred against both brothers "for having carried away Ellen Turner, spinster,
then a maid and heir apparent unto her father, for the sake of the lucre of her substance; and for having afterwards unlawfully and against her will
married the said Ellen Turner.
They were tried in March of the following year, Edward Wakefield having apparently given himself up,
and found guilty, remaining in Lancaster Jail for a couple of months, when they were brought up to the court of King's Bench for judgment.
The prosecution pressed for a severe penalty. Edward Wakefield pleaded that his trial had already cost him £3000.
Mr. Justice Bayley, in summing up,
spoke severely of the gross deception practiced upon an innocent girl, and sentenced the brothers each to three years' imprisonment,
William Wakefield in Lancaster Jail, and Edward Gibbon Wakefield in Newgate, which sentences were duly enforced.
The marriage was annulled by an Act of Parliament, although Wakefield petitioned against it,
and was brought from Newgate, at his own request, to oppose the second reading of the bill.
He also wrote and published a pamphlet from the jail to show that Miss Turner had been a consenting party to the marriage, and was really his wife.
Neither his address nor his pamphlet availed much, for the bill for the divorce passed both Houses.
That Mr. Wakefield was a shrewd critic and close observer of all that went on in the Newgate of those days,
will be admitted by those who have read his book on "the punishment of death,
which was based on his jail experiences, and of which I have availed myself in the last chapter.
After their release from Lancaster and Newgate respectively, both Wakefields went abroad.
Mr. W. Wakefield served in a continental army, and rose to the rank of colonel,
after which he went to New Zealand, and held an important post in that colony.
Mr. E. G. Wakefield took part in the scheme for the colonization of North Australia, and for some years resided in that colony.
Miss Turner subsequently married Mr. Legh of Lym Hall, Cheshire.
It must not be imagined that although highway robbery was now nearly extinct, and felonious outrages in the streets were rare,
that thieves or depredators were idle or entirely unsuccessful.
Bigger "jobs" than ever were planned and attempted,
as in the burglary at Lambeth Palace, when the thieves were fortunately disappointed, the archbishop having, before he left town,
sent his plate-chests, eight in number, to the silversmith's for greater security.
The jewelers were always a favorite prey of the London thieves.
Shops were broken into, as when that of Grimaldi and Johnson, in the Strand, was robbed of watches to the value of £6000.
Where robbery with violence was intended, the perpetrators had now to adopt various shifts and contrivances to secure their victim.
No more curious instance of this ever occurred than the assault made by one Howard upon a Mr. Mullay, with intent to rob him.
The latter had advertised, offering a sum of £1000 to anyone who would introduce him to some mercantile equipment.
Howard replied, desiring Mr. Mullay to call upon him in a house in Red Lion Square.
Mr. Mullay went, and a second interview was agreed upon, when a third person, Mr. Owen,
through whose interest an appointment under Government was to be obtained for Mullay, would be present.
Mr. Mullay called again, taking with him £500 in cash. Howard discovered this, and his manner was very suspicious;
there were weapons in the room -- a long knife, a heavy trap-ball bat, and a poker.
Mr. Mullay became alarmed, and as Mr. Owen did not appear, withdrew;
Howard, strange to say, making no attempt to detain him; probably because Mullay promised to return a few days later, and to bring more money.
On this renewed visit Mr. Owen was still absent, and Mr. Mullay agreed to write him a note from a copy Howard gave him.
While thus engaged, Howard thrust the poker into the fire.
Mullay protested, and then Howard, under the influence of ungovernable rage, as it seemed, jumped up,
locked the door, and attacked Mullay violently with the trap-ball bat and knife.
Mullay defended himself, and managed to break the knife, but not before he had cut himself severely.
A life and death struggle ensued. Mullay cried "Murder!"
Howard swore he would finish him, but proved the weaker of the two, and Mullay got him down on the floor.
Howard was secured, given into custody, and committed to Newgate.
The defense he set up was, that Mullay had used epithets towards him while they were negotiating a business matter,
and that, being an irritable temper, he had struck Mullay, after which a violent scuffle took place.
It was, however, proved that Howard was in needy circumstances, and that his proposals to Mr. Mullay could only have originated in a desire to rob him.
He was found guilty of an assault with intent, and sentenced to transportation for fourteen years.
A more complicated and altogether most extraordinary case of assault, with intent to extort money, occurred a few years later.
It was perpetrated upon a respectable country solicitor,
Mr. Gee, of Bishop Stortford, who administered the estate of a certain Mr. Canning, deceased.
This Mr. Canning had left his widow a life interest in £2000 so long as she remained unmarried.
The money went after her to her children.
Mr. Gee had invested £1200 of this, and was seeking how best to place the remaining £800,
when he was asked to meet a Mr. Heath in London with regard to the sale of certain lands at Bishop Stortford.
An appointment was made and kept by Mr. Gee,
but on arrival he was met by a young sailor with a letter which begged Mr. Gee to go to Heath's house, as the latter was not well.
Mr. Gee went in the coach sent for him, and alighted at 27, York Street, West, Commercial Road.
The coach immediately drove off; Mr. Gee entered the house, asked for Mr. Heath, was told he would find him in the back kitchen at breakfast.
He was about to descend the stairs when three persons, one of them the young sailor,
fell upon him, and in spite of his resistance carried him into a sort of den partitioned off at the end of the back kitchen.
There he was seated on some sort of wooden bench and securely fastened.
"A chain fixed to staples at his back passed round his chest under his arms, and was padlocked on the left side;"
his feet were bound with cords and made fast to rings in the floor. Thus manacled, one of the party, who pretended to be Mrs. Canning's brother,
addressed him, insisting that he should forthwith sign a cheque for the £800 of the Canning inheritance still uninvested,
and write an order sufficient to secure the surrender of the other £1200.
Mr. Gee at first stoutly refused.
Then, as they warned him that he would be kept a prisoner in total darkness in this horrible den until he agreed to their demands,
he gave in, and signed the documents thus illegally extorted.
One was a cheque for £800 on his bankers, the other an order to Mr. Bell of Newport, Essex, requesting the surrender of a deed.
His captors having thus succeeded in their designs, left him, no doubt to realize the money.
The door of his place of durance stood open, and Mr. Gee began to consider whether he might not escape.
For three hours he struggled without success with his bonds,
but at length managed to wriggle out of the chain which confined his body, and soon loosened the ropes round his feet.
Thus free, he eluded the vigilance of two of the party, who were at dinner in the front kitchen,
and creeping out into the garden at the back, climbed the wall, and got into the street.
His first act was to send a messenger to stop the cheque and the order to Mr. Bell, his next to seek the help of the police.
Two Bow Street runners were dispatched to the house in York Street, which had evidently been taken on purpose for the outrage.
There was no furniture in the place, and the den in the kitchen had been recently and specially constructed of boards of immense strength and thickness.
It was a cell five feet by three, within another, the intervening being filled with rammed earth to deaden the sound.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 15: Newgate notorieties, part 3
On the arrival of the police the house was empty.
The two men on guard had gone off immediately after Mr. Gee had escaped, but they returned later in the day, and were apprehended.
Inquiries set on foot also elicited the suspicion that the person who had represented Mrs. Canning's brother
was a blind man named Edwards, who had taken this house in York Street, and who was known to be a frequent visitor at Mrs. Canning's.
A watch was set on him at her house, where he was soon afterwards arrested.
Edwards, whom Mr. Gee easily identified with the others, at once admitted that he was the prime mover of the conspiracy.
He had sought by all legal means to obtain possession of the £2000, but had failed, and had had recourse to more violent means.
It turned out that he was really married to Mrs. Canning,
both having been recognized by the clergyman who had performed the ceremony, and the assault had been committed to secure the money
which Mrs. Canning had lost by remarriage.
All three men were committed for trial, although Edwards wished to exculpate the others as having only acted under his order.
At the trial the indictment charging them with felony could not be sustained, but they were found guilty of conspiracy and assault.
Edwards was sentenced to two years' imprisonment in Newgate,
Weedon and Lecasser to twelve and six months respectively in Coldbath Fields.
At no period could thieves in London or elsewhere have prospered had they been unable to dispose of their ill-gotten goods.
The trade of fence, or receiver, therefore, is very nearly as old as the crimes which it so obviously fostered.
One of the most notorious, and for a time most successful practitioners in this illicit trade, passed through Newgate in 1831.
The name of Ikey Solomons was long remembered by thief and thief-taker.
He began as an itinerant street vendor at eight, at ten he passed bad money,
at fourteen he was a pickpocket and a "duffer," or a seller of sham goods.
He early saw the profits to be made out of purchasing stolen goods, but could not embark in it at first for want of capital.
He was taken up when still in his teens for stealing a pocketbook, and was sentenced to transportation, but did not get beyond the hulks at Chatham.
On his release an uncle, a slop-seller in Chatham, gave him a situation as "barker," or salesman,
at which he realized £150 within a couple of years.
With this capital he returned to London and set up as a fence.
He had such great aptitude for business, and such a thorough knowledge of the real value of goods,
that he was soon admitted to be one of the best judges known of all kinds of property, from a glass bottle to a five hundred guinea chronometer.
But he never paid more than a fixed price for all articles of the same class, whatever their intrinsic value.
Thus, a watch was paid for as a watch, whether it was of gold or silver; a piece of linen as such, whether the stuff was coarse or fine.
This rule in dealing with stolen goods continues to this day, and has made the fortune of many since Ikey.
Solomons also established a system of provincial agency, by which stolen goods were passed on from London to the seaports, and so abroad.
Jewels were re-set,
diamonds refaced; all marks by which other articles might be identified, the selvages of linen, the stamps on shoes,
the number and names on watches, were carefully removed or obliterated after the goods passed out of his hands.
On one occasion the whole of the proceeds of a robbery from a boot shop was traced to Solomons';
the owner came with the police, and was morally convinced that it was his property,
but could not positively identify it, and Ikey defied them to remove a single shoe.
In the end the injured bootmaker agreed to buy back his stolen stock
at the price Solomons had paid for it, and it cost him about a hundred pounds to re-stock his shop with his own goods.
As a general rule Ikey Solomons confined his purchases to small articles, mostly of jewelery and plate,
which he kept concealed in a hiding-place with a trap-door just under his bed.
He lived in Rosemary Lane, and sometimes he had as much as £20,000 worth of goods secreted on the premises.
he put another lady, with whom he was on intimate terms.
The second house was in Lower Queen Street, Islington, and he used it for some time as a depot for valuables.
But it was eventually discovered by Mrs. Solomons, a very jealous wife,
and this, with the danger arising from an extensive robbery of watches in Cheapside, in which Ikey was implicated as a receiver,
led him to think seriously of trying his fortunes in another land.
He was about to emigrate to New South Wales, when he was arrested at Islington and committed to Newgate on a charge of receiving stolen goods.
While thus incarcerated he managed to escape from custody, but not actually from jail, by an ingenious contrivance which is worth mentioning.
He claimed to be admitted to bail, and was taken from Newgate on a writ of habeas before one of the judges sitting at Westminster.
He was conveyed in a coach driven by a confederate, and under the escort of a couple of turnkeys.
Solomons, while waiting to appear in court, persuaded the turnkeys to take him to a public-house, where all might "refresh."
While there he was joined by his wife and other friends.
After a short carouse the prisoner went into Westminster, his case was heard, bail refused, and he was ordered back to Newgate.
But he once more persuaded the turnkeys to pause at the public, where more liquor was consumed.
When the journey was resumed, Mrs. Solomons accompanied her husband in the coach. Half-way to Newgate she was taken with a fit.
One turnkey was stupidly drunk, and Ikey persuaded the other, who was not much better,
to let the coach change and pass Petticoat Lane en route to the jail, where the suffering woman might be handed over to her friends.
On stopping at a door in this low street, Ikey jumped out, ran into the house, slamming the door behind him.
He passed through and out at the back, and was soon beyond pursuit.
By-and-by the turnkeys, sobered by their loss, returned to Newgate alone, and pleaded in excuse that they had been drugged.
Ikey left no traces, and the police could hear nothing of him. He had in fact gone out of the country, to Copenhagen, whence he passed on to New York.
There he devoted himself to the circulation of forged notes. He was also anxious to do business in watches,
and begged his wife to send him over a consignment of cheap "righteous" watches, or such as had been honestly obtained, and not "on the cross."
But Mrs. Solomons could not resist the temptation to dabble in stolen goods, and she was found shipping watches of the wrong category to New York.
For this she received a sentence of fourteen years' transportation, and was sent to Van Diemen's Land.
Ikey joined her at Hobart Town, where they set up a general shop, and soon began to prosper.
He was, however, recognized, and ere long an order came out from home for his arrest and transfer to England,
which presently followed, and again found himself an inmate of Newgate, waiting trial as a receiver and a prison-breaker.
He was indicted on eight charges, two only of which were substantiated, but on each of them he received a sentence of seven years' transportation.
At his own request he was reconveyed to Hobart Town, where his son had been carrying on the business.
Whether Ikey was "assigned" to his own family is not recorded, but no doubt he succeeded to his own property when the term of servitude had expired.
No doubt, on the removal of Ikey Solomons from the scene, his mantle fell upon worthy successors.
There was an increase rather than an abatement in jewel and bullion robberies in the years immediately following,
and the thieves seem to have had no difficulty in disposing of their spoil.
One of the largest robberies of its class was that effected upon the Custom House in the winter of 1834.
A large amount of specie was nearly always retained here in the department of the Receiver of Fines.
This was known to some clerks in the office, who began to consider how they might lay hands on a lot of cash.
Being inexperienced, they decided to call in the services of a couple of professional housebreakers,
Jordan and Sullivan, who at once set to work in a business-like way to obtain impressions of the keys of the strong room and chest.
But before committing themselves to an attempt on the latter, it was of importance to ascertain how much it usually contained.
For this purpose Jordan waited on the receiver to make a small payment, for which he tendered a fifty-pound note.
The chest was opened to give change, and a heavy tray lifted out which plainly held some £4000 in cash.
Some difficulty then arose as to gaining admission to the strong room, and it was arranged that a man, May, another Custom House clerk,
should be introduced into the building, and secreted there during the night to accomplish the robbery.
May was smuggled in through a window on the esplanade behind an opened umbrella. When the place was quite deserted
he broke open the chest and stole £4700 in notes, with a quantity of gold and some silver.
He went out next morning with the booty when the doors were re-opened, and attracted no attention.
The spoil was fairly divided; part of the notes were disposed of to a traveling "receiver," who passed over to the Continent and there cashed them easily.
This occurred in November 1834. The Custom House officials were in a state of consternation,
and the police were unable at first to get on the track of the thieves.
While the excitement was still fresh, a new robbery of diamonds was committed at a bonded warehouse in the immediate neighborhood, on Custom House Quay.
The jewels had belonged to a Spanish countess recently deceased, who had sent them to England for greater security on the outbreak of the first Carlist war.
At her death the diamonds were divided between her four daughters, but only half had been claimed,
and at the time of the robbery there were still £6000 worth in the warehouse.
These were deposited in an iron chest of great strength on the second floor.
The thieves it was supposed had secreted themselves in the warehouse during business hours, and waited till night to carry out their plans.
Some ham sandwiches, several cigar ends, and two empty champagne bottles were found on the premises next day, showing how they had passed their time.
They had had serious work to get at the diamonds. It was necessary to force one heavy door from its hinges, and to cut through the thick panels of another.
The lock and fastenings of the chest were forced by means of a "jack," an instrument known to housebreakers,
which if introduced into a keyhole, and worked like a bit and brace, will soon destroy the strongest lock.
The thieves were satisfied with the diamonds; they broke open other cases containing gold watches and plate, but abstracted nothing.
The police were of opinion that these robberies were both the work of the same hand.
But it was not until the autumn that they traced some of the notes stolen from the Custom House to Jordan and Sullivan.
About this time also suspicion fell upon Huey, one of the clerks, who was arrested soon afterwards, and made a clean breast of the whole affair.
There was a hunt for the two well-known house-breakers, who were eventually heard of at a lodging in Kennington.
But they at once made tracks, and took up their residence under assumed names in a tavern in Bloomsbury.
The police lost all trace of them for some days, but at length Sullivan's brother was followed from the house in Kennington to the above-mentioned tavern.
Both the thieves were now apprehended, but only a small portion of the lost property was recovered,
notwithstanding a minute search through the room they had occupied.
After their arrest, Jordan's wife and Sullivan's brother came to the inn, and begged to be allowed to visit this room;
but their request, in spite of their earnest entreaties,
was refused, at the instigation of the police. A few days later a frequent guest at the tavern arrived, and had this same room allotted to him.
A fire was lit in it, and the maid in doing so threw a lot of rubbish, as it seemed, which had accumulated under the grate, on top of the burning coals.
By-and-by the occupant of the room noticed something glittering in the center of the fire, which, to inspect more closely, he took out with the tongs.
It was a large gold brooch set in pearls, but a portion of the mounting had melted with the heat.
The fire was raked out, and in the ashes were found seven large and four dozen small brilliants, also seven emeralds,
one of them of considerable size.
A part of the "swag" stolen from the bonded warehouse was thus recovered, but it was supposed that a number of the stolen notes had perished in the fire.
The condign punishment meted out to these Custom House robbers had no deterrent effect seemingly.
Within three months, three new and most mysterious burglaries were committed at the West End, all in houses adjoining each other.
One was occupied by the Portuguese ambassador, who lost a quantity of jewelery from an escritoire, and his neighbors lost plate and cash.
Not the slightest clue to these large affairs was ever obtained, but it is probable that they were "put up" jobs, or managed with the complicity of servants.
The next year twelve thousand sovereigns were cleverly stolen in the Mile End Road.
The gold-dust robbery of 1839, the first of its kind, was cleverly and carefully planned with the assistance of a dishonest employee.
A young man named Caspar, clerk to a steam-ship company,
learnt through the firm's correspondence that a quantity of gold-dust
brought in a man-of-war from Brazil had been transhipped at Falmouth for conveyance to London.
The letter informed him of the marks and sizes of the cases containing the precious metal,
and he with his father arranged that a messenger should call for the stuff with forged credentials, and anticipating the rightful owner.
The fraudulent messenger, by the help of young Caspar, established his claim to the boxes, paid the wharfage dues, and carried off the gold-dust.
Presently the proper person arrived from the consignees, but found the gold-dust gone.
The police were at once employed, and after infinite pains they discovered the person, one Moss, who had acted as the messenger.
Moss was known to be intimate with the elder Caspar,
father of the clerk to the steam-ship company, and these facts were deemed sufficient to justify the arrest of all three.
They also ascertained that a gold-refiner,
Solomons, had sold bar gold to the value of £1200 to certain bullion dealers.
Solomons was not straightforward in his replies as to where he got the gold, and he was soon placed in the dock with the Caspars and Moss.
Moss presently turned approver,
and implicated "Money Moses," another Jew, for the whole affair had been planned and executed by members of the Hebrew persuasion.
"Money Moses" had received the stolen gold-dust from Moss' father-in-law, Davis, or Isaacs, who was never arrested,
and passed it on to Solomons by his daughter, a widow named Abrahams.
In the course of the trial it came out that almost every one concerned except the Caspars had endeavored to defraud his accomplices.
Moss peached because he declared he had been done out of the proper price of the gold-dust; but it was clear that he had tried to appropriate the whole of the stuff,
instead of handing it or the price of it back to the Caspars.
"Money Moses" and Mrs. Abrahams imposed upon Moss as to the price paid by Solomons;
Mrs. Abrahams imposed upon her father by abstracting a portion of the dust and selling it on her own account;
Solomons cheated the whole lot by retaining half the gold in his possession, and only giving an I. O. U. for it,
which he refused to redeem on account of the row about the robbery.
Moses, it may be added, was a direct descendant of Ikey Solomons.
He was ostensibly a publican,
and kept the Black Lion in Vinegar Yard, Drury Lane, where secretly he did business as one of the most daring and successful fencers ever known in the metropolis.
His arrest and conviction cast dismay over the whole gang of receivers, and for a time seriously checked the nefarious traffic.
It may be added that prison life did not agree with "Money Moses"; a striking change came over his appearance while in Newgate.
Before his confinement he had been a sleek round person, addicted obviously to the pleasures of the table.
He did not thrive on prison fare,
now more strictly meager, thanks to the inspectors and the more stringent discipline, and before he embarked for Australia to undergo his fourteen years,
he was reported to have fallen away to a shadow.
Having brought down the records of great frauds, forgeries, and thefts from about 1825 to 1840,
I will now retrace my steps and give some account of the more remarkable murders during that period.
No murder has created greater sensation and horror throughout England than that of Mr. Weare by Thurtell, Hunt, and Probert.
As this was accomplished beyond the limits of the metropolis, and its perpetrators arraigned at Hertford,
where the principal actor suffered death, the case hardly comes within the limits of my subject.
But Probert, who turned king's evidence, and materially assisted conviction,
was tried at the Old Bailey the following year for horse-stealing, and hanged in front of Newgate.
The murder was still fresh in the memory of the populace, and Probert was all but lynched on his way to jail.
According to his statement, when sentenced to death, he had been driven to horse-stealing by the execration which had pursued him after the murder.
Every door had been closed against him, every hope of future support blasted.
Since the calamitous event," he went on, "that happened at Hertford, I have been a lost man."
The event which he styles calamitous we may well characterize as one of the most deliberately atrocious murders on record.
Thurtell was a gambler, and Weare had won a good deal of money from him.
Weare was supposed to carry a "private bank" about with him in a pocket in his under waistcoat.
To obtain possession of this, Thurtell with his two associates resolved to kill him.
The victim was invited to visit Probert's cottage in the country near Elstree.
Thurtell drove him down in a gig, "to be killed as he traveled," in Thurtell's own words.
The others followed, and on overtaking Thurtell, found he had done the job alone in a retired part of the road known as Gill's Hill Lane.
The murderer explained that he had first fired a pistol at Weare's head, but the shot glanced off his cheek.
Then he attacked the other's throat with a penknife, and last of all drove the pistol barrel into his forehead.
After the murder the villains divided the spoil, and went on to Probert's cottage, and supped off pork-chops brought down on purpose.
During the night they sought to dispose of the body by throwing it into a pond, but two days later had to throw it into another pond.
Meanwhile the discovery of pistol and knife spattered with human blood and brains
raised the alarm, and suspicion fell upon the three murderers, who were arrested.
The crime was brought home to Thurtell by the confession of Hunt,
one of his accomplices, who took the police to the pond, where the remains of the unfortunate Mr. Weare were discovered, sunk in a sack weighted by stones.
Probert was then admitted as a witness, and the case was fully proved against Thurtell, who was hanged in front of Hertford Jail.
Hunt, in consideration of the information he had given, escaped death, and was sentenced to transportation for life.
Widespread horror and indignation was evoked throughout the kingdom by the discovery of the series
of atrocious murders perpetrated in Edinburgh by the miscreants Burke and Hare,
the first of whom has added to the British language a synonym for illegal suppression.
The crimes of these inhuman purveyors to medical science do not fall within the limits of this work.
But Burke and Hare had their imitators further south,
and of these Bishop and Williams, who were guilty of many peculiar atrocities, ended their murderous careers in front of the debtors' door at Newgate.
Bishop, whose real name was Head, married a half-sister of Williams'. Williams was a professional resurrectionist, or body-snatcher,
a trade almost openly countenanced when "subjects" for the anatomy schools were only to be got by rifling graves, or worse.
Bishop was a carpenter, but having been suddenly thrown out of work, he joined his brother-in-law in his line of business.
After a little
Bishop got weary of the dangers and fatigues of exhumation, and proposed to Williams that instead of disinterring they should murder their subjects.
Bishop confessed that he was moved to this by the example of Burke and Hare.
They pursued their terrible trade for five years without scruple and without detection.
Eventually the law overtook them, but almost by accident.
They presented themselves about noon one day at the dissecting room of King's College Hospital, accompanied by a third man,
an avowed "snatcher" and habitué of the Fortune of War, a public-house in Smithfield frequented openly by men of this awful profession.
This man, May, asked the porter at King's College if "he wanted anything?" the euphemism for offering a body.
The porter asked what he had got, and the answer was, a male subject.
Reference was made to Mr. Partridge, the demonstrator in anatomy,
and after some haggling they agreed on a price, and in the afternoon the snatchers brought a hamper which contained a body in a sack.
The porter received it, but from its freshness became suspicious of foul play.
Mr. Partridge was sent for, and he with some of the students soon decided that the corpse had not died a natural death.
The snatchers were detained, the police sent for, and arrest followed as a matter of course.
An inquest was held on the body, which was identified as that of an Italian boy,
Carlo Ferrari, who made a living by exhibiting white mice about the streets,
and the jury returned a verdict of willful murder against persons unknown, expressing a strong opinion that Bishop,
Williams, and May had been concerned in the transaction.
Meanwhile, a search had been made at Nova Scotia Gardens, Bethnal Green, where Bishop and Williams lived.
At first nothing peculiar was found; but at a second search the back-garden ground was dug up,
and in one corner, at some depth, a bundle of clothes were unearthed, which, with a hairy cap,
were known to be what Ferrari had worn when last seen.
In another portion of the garden more clothing, partly male and partly female, was discovered,
plainly pointing to the perpetration of other crimes.
These facts were represented before the police magistrate
who examined Bishop and his fellows, and further incriminating evidence adduced, to the effect that the prisoners had bartered for a coach to carry "a stiff 'un";
they had also been seen to leave their cottage, carrying out a sack with something heavy inside. On this they were fully committed to Newgate for trial.
This trial came off in due course at the Central Criminal Court, where the prisoners were charged on two counts,
one that of the murder of the Italian boy, the other that of a boy unknown.
The evidence from first to last was circumstantial,
but the jury, after a short deliberation, did not hesitate to bring in a verdict of guilty, and all three were condemned to death.
Shortly before the day fixed for execution, Bishop made a full confession, the bulk of which bore the impress of truth,
although it included statements that were improbable and unsubstantiated.
He asserted that the victim was a Lincolnshire lad, and not an Italian boy, although the latter was fully proved.
According to the confession, death had been inflicted by drowning in a well, whereas the medical evidence all pointed to violence.
It was, however, pretty clear that this victim, like preceding ones, had been lured to Nova Scotia Gardens, and there drugged with a large dose of laudanum.
While they were in a state of insensibility the murder was committed.
Bishop's confession was endorsed by Williams, and the immediate result was the respite of May.
A very painful scene occurred in Newgate when the news of his escape from death was imparted to May.
He fainted, and the warrant of mercy nearly proved his death-blow. The other two looked on at his agitation with an indifference amounting to apathy.
The execution took place a week or two later, in the presence of such a crowd as had not been seen near Newgate for years.
I will close this chapter with a brief account of another murder,
the memory of which is still fresh in the minds of Londoners, although half a century has passed since it was committed.
The horror with which Greenacre's crime struck the town was unparalleled since the time when Catherine Hayes slew her husband.
There were many features of resemblance in these crimes.
The decapitation and dismemberment, the bestowal of the remains in various parts of the town, the preservation of the head in spirits of wine,
in the hope that the features might some day be recognized, were alike in both.
The murder in both cases was long a profound mystery. In this which I am now describing,
a bricklayer found a human trunk near some new buildings in the Edgeware Road, one morning in the last week of 1836.
The inquest on these remains, which medical examination showed to be those of a female,
returned a verdict of willful murder against some person unknown.
On the 7th July, 1837,
the lockman of "Ben Jonson lock," in Stepney Fields, found a human head jammed into the lock gates.
Closer investigation proved that it belonged to the trunk already discovered on the 2nd February.
A further discovery was made in an osier bed near Cold Harbor Lane, Camberwell,
where a workman found a bundle containing two human legs, in a drain.
These were the missing members of the same mutilated trunk,
and there was now evidence sufficient to establish conclusively that the woman thus collected piecemeal had been barbarously done to death.
But the affair still remained a profound mystery. No light was thrown upon it till, towards the end of March,
a Mr. Gay of Goodge Street came to view the head, and immediately recognized it as that of a widowed sister, Hannah Brown,
who had been missing since the previous Christmas Day.
The murdered individual was thus identified. The next step was to ascertain where and with whom she had last been seen.
This brought suspicion on to a certain James Greenacre,
whom she was to have married, and in whose company she had left her own lodgings to visit his in Camberwell.
The police wished to refer to Greenacre, but as he was not forthcoming,
a warrant was issued for his apprehension, which was effected at Kennington on the 24th March.
A woman named Gale, who lived with him, was arrested at the same time. The prisoners were examined at the Marylebone police court.
Greenacre, a stout, middle-aged man, wrapped in a brown greatcoat, assumed an air of insolent bravado;
but his despair must have been great, as was evident from his attempt to strangle himself in the station-house.
Suspicion grew almost to certainty as the evidence was unfolded.
Mrs. Brown was a washer-woman, supposed to be worth some money; hence Greenacre's offer of marriage.
She had realized all her effects, and brought them with her furniture to Greenacre's lodgings. The two when married were to emigrate to Hudson's Bay.
Whether it was greed or a quarrel that drove Greenacre to the desperate deed remains obscure.
They were apparently good friends when last seen together at a neighbor's, where they seemed "perfectly happy and sociable, and eager for the wedding day."
But Greenacre in his confession pretended that he and his intended had quarreled over her property or the want of it,
and that in a moment of anger he knocked her down.
He thought he had killed her, and in his terror began at once to consider how he might dispose of the body and escape arrest.
While she was senseless, but really still alive, he cut off her head, and dismembered the body in the manner already described.
It is scarcely probable that he would have gone to this extremity if he had had no previous evil intention,
and the most probable inference is that he inveigled Mrs. Brown to his lodgings with the set purpose of taking her life.
His measures for the disposal of the corpus delicti remind us of those taken by Mrs. Hayes and her associates,
or of Gardelle's frantic efforts to conceal his crime.
The most ghastly part of the story is that which deals with his getting rid of the head.
This, wrapped up in a silk handkerchief,
he carried under his coat-flaps through the streets, and afterwards on his cap in a crowded city omnibus.
It was not until he left the bus, and walked up by the Regent's Canal, that he conceived the idea of throwing the head into the water.
Another day elapsed before he got rid of the rest of the body,
all of which, according to his own confession, made no doubt with the idea of exonerating Mrs. Gale, he accomplished without her assistance.
On the other hand, it was adduced in evidence that Mrs. Gale had been at his lodgings the very day after the murder,
and was seen to be busily engaged in washing down the house with bucket and mop.
Greenacre, when tried at the Old Bailey, admitted that he had been guilty of manslaughter.
While conversing with Mrs. Brown, he declared the unfortunate woman was rocking herself to and fro in a chair;
as she leant back he put his foot against the chair, and so tilted it over.
Mrs. Brown fell with it, and Greenacre, to his horror, found that she was dead.
But the medical evidence was clear that the decapitation had been effected during life, and the jury, after a short deliberation,
without hesitation brought in a verdict of willful murder.
The woman Gale was also found guilty, but sentence of death was only passed on Greenacre.
The execution was, as usual, attended by an immense concourse, and Greenacre died amidst the loudest execrations.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 16: Newgate notorieties continued, part 1.
As the century advanced crimes of fraud increased.
They not only became more numerous, but they were on a wider scale.
The most extensive and systematic robberies were planned and carried out so as long to escape detection.
One of the earliest of the big operators in fraudulent finance was Edward Beaumont Smith,
who was convicted in 1841 of uttering false exchequer bills to an almost fabulous amount.
A not entirely novel kind of fraud, but one carried out on a larger scale than heretofore,
came to light in this same year, 1841.
This was the willful shipwreck and casting away of a vessel which, with her supposed cargo, had been heavily insured.
The 'Dryad' was a brig owned principally by two persons named Wallace, one a seaman, the other merchant.
She was freighted by the firm of Zulueta and Co. for a voyage to Santa Cruz.
Her owners insured her for a full sum of £2000, after which the Wallaces insured her privily
with other underwriters for a second sum of £2000.
After this, on the faith of forced bills of lading, the captain, Loose by name,
being a party to the intended fraud, they obtained further insurances on goods never shipped.
It was fully proved in evidence that when the Dryad sailed she carried nothing but the cargo belonging to Zulueta and Co.
Yet the Wallaces pretended to have put on board quantities of flannels, cloths, cotton prints,
beef, pork, butter, and earthenwares, on all of which they effected insurances.
Loose had his instructions to cast away the ship on the first possible opportunity, and from the time of his leaving Liverpool
The larboard pump was suffered to remain choked up, and the long-boat was fitted with tackles and held ready for use at a moment's notice.
The ship, however, met with exasperatingly fine weather, and it was not until the captain reached the West India Islands
that he got a chance of accomplishing his crime.
At a place called the Silver Keys he ran the ship on the reef.
But another ship, concluding that he was acting in ignorance, rendered him assistance.
The 'Dryad' was got off, repaired, and her voyage renewed to Santa Cruz.
He crept along the coast close in shore, looking for a quiet spot to cast away the ship,
and at last, when within fifteen miles of port, with wind and weather perfectly fair, he ran her on to the rocks.
Even then she might have been saved, but the captain would not suffer the crew to act. Nearly the whole of the cargo was lost as well as the ship.
The captain and crew, however, got safely to Jamaica, and so to England; the captain dying on the voyage home.
The crime soon became public.
Mate, carpenter, and crew were eager to disavow complicity, and voluntarily gave information.
The Wallaces were arrested, committed to Newgate, and tried at the Old Bailey.
The case was clearly proved against them, and both were sentenced to transportation for life.
While lying in Newgate, awaiting removal to the convict ship, both prisoners made full confessions.
According to their own statements the loss of the 'Dryad' was only one of six intentional shipwrecks with which they had been concerned.
The crime of fraudulent insurance they declared was very common, and the underwriters must have lost great sums in this way.
The merchant Wallace said he had been led into the crime by the advice and example of a city friend who had gone largely into this nefarious business;
this Wallace added that his friend had made several voyages with the distinct intention of superintending the predetermined shipwrecks.
The other Wallace, the sailor, also traced his lapse into crime to evil counsel.
He was an honest sea-captain, he said, trading from Liverpool, where once he had the misfortune to be introduced to a man of wealth,
the foundations of which had been laid by buying old ships on purpose to cast them away.
This person made much of Wallace, encouraged his attentions to his daughter,
and tempted him to take to fraudulent insurance as a certain method of achieving fortune.
Wallace's relations warned him against his Liverpool friend,
but he would not take their advice, and developing his transactions, ended as we have seen.
A clergyman nearly a century later followed in the steps of Dr. Dodd, but did not under more humane laws lose his life.
The Rev. W. Bailey, LL.D., was convicted at the Central Criminal Court, in February 1843, of forgery.
A notorious miser, Robert Smith, had recently died in Seven Dials, where he had amassed a considerable fortune.
But among the charges on the estate he left
was a promissory note for £2875, produced by Dr. Bailey, and purporting to be signed by Smith.
The executors to the estate disputed the validity of this document.
Miss Bailey, the doctor's sister, in whose favor the note was said to have been given,
then brought an action against the administrators, and at the trial Dr. Bailey swore that the note had been given him by Smith.
The jury did not believe him, and the verdict was for the defendants.
Subsequently Bailey was arrested on a charge of forgery, and after a long trial found guilty. His sentence was transportation for life.
A gigantic conspiracy to defraud was discovered in the following year, when a solicitor named William Henry Barber,
Joshua Fletcher a surgeon, and three others were charged with forging wills for the purpose of obtaining unclaimed stock in the funds.
There were two separate affairs.
In the first a maiden lady, Miss Slack,
who was the possessor of two separate sums in consols, neglected through strange carelessness on her own part and that of her friends
to draw the dividends on more than one sum.
The other, remaining unclaimed for ten years, was transferred at the end of that time to the commissioners for the reduction of the National Debt.
Barber, it was said, became aware of this,
and that he gained access to Miss Slack on pretense of conveying to her some funded property left her by an aunt.
By this means her signature was obtained; a forged will was prepared bequeathing the unclaimed stock to Miss Slack;
a note purporting to be from Miss Slack was addressed to the governor of the Bank of England, begging that the said stock might be handed over to her,
and a person calling herself Miss Slack duly attended at the bank, where the money was handed over to her in proper form.
A second will, also forged, was propounded at Doctors Commons as that of a Mrs. Hunt of Bristol.
Mrs. Hunt had left money in the funds which remained unclaimed, and had been transferred, as in Miss Slack's case.
Here again the money, with ten years' interest, was handed over to Barber and another calling himself Thomas Hunt, an executor of the will.
It was shown that the will must be a forgery,
as its signature was dated 1829, whereas Mrs. Hunt actually died in 1806.
A third similar fraud to the amount of £2000 was also brought to light.
Fletcher was the moving spirit of the whole business. It was he who had introduced Barber to Miss Slack,
and held all the threads of these intricate and nefarious transactions.
Barber was subsequently pardoned, but was not replaced on the rolls as an attorney till 1855,
when Lord Campbell delivered judgment on Barber's petition, to the effect that
the evidence to establish his (Barber's) connivance in the frauds was too doubtful for us to continue his exclusion any longer.
Banks and bankers continued to be victimized.
In 1844
the Bank of England was defrauded of a sum of £8000 by one of its clerks, Burgess, in conjunction with an accomplice named Elder.
Burgess fraudulently transferred consols to the above amount, standing in the name of Mr. Oxenford, to another party.
A person, Elder of course, who personated Oxenford, attended at the bank to complete the transfer and sell the stock.
Burgess, who was purposely on leave from the bank, effected the sale, which was paid for with a cheque for nearly the whole amount on Lubbock's Bank.
Burgess and Elder proceeded in company to cash this, but as they wanted all gold,
the cashier gave them eight Bank of England notes for £1000 each, saying that they could get so much specie nowhere else.
Thither Elder went alone, provided with a number of canvas and one large carpet-bag.
But when the latter was filled with gold it was too heavy to lift,
and Elder had to be assisted by two bank porters, who carried it for him to a carriage waiting near the Mansion House.
The thieves, for Elder was soon joined by Burgess, drove together to Ben Caunt's, the pugilist's, public-house in St. Martin's Lane,
where the cash was transferred from the carpet-bag to a portmanteau.
The same evening both started for Liverpool, and embarking on board the mail steamer 'Britannia,' escaped to the United States.
Burgess' continued absence was soon noticed at the bank.
Suspicions were aroused when it was found that he had been employed in selling stock for Mr. Oxenford, which developed into certainty
as soon as that gentleman was referred to.
Mr. Oxenford having denied that he had made any transfer of stock, the matter was at once put into the hands of the police.
A smart detective, Forrester, after a little inquiry,
established the fact that the man who had personated Mr. Oxenford was a horse-dealer named Joseph Elder, an intimate acquaintance of Burgess'.
Forrester next traced the fugitives to Liverpool,
and thence to Halifax, whither he followed them, accompanied by a confidential clerk from the bank.
At Halifax Forrester learnt that the men he wanted had gone on to Boston, thence to Buffalo and Canada, and back to Boston.
He found them at length residing at the latter place, one as a landed proprietor, the other as a publican.
Elder, the former, was soon apprehended at his house, but he evaded the law by hanging himself with his pocket-handkerchief.
The inn belonging to Burgess was surrounded
but he escaped through a back door on to the river, and rowed off in a boat to a hiding-place in the woods.
Next day a person betrayed him for the reward, and he was soon captured.
The proceeds of the robbery were lodged in a Boston bank,
but four hundred sovereigns were found on Elder, while two hundred more were found in Burgess' effects.
Burgess was eventually brought back to England, tried at the Central Criminal Court, and sentenced to transportation for life.
Within a month or two the bank of Messrs. Rogers and Co., Clement's Lane, was broken into.
Robberies as daring in conception as they were boldly executed were common enough.
One night a quantity of plate was stolen from Windsor Castle; another time Buckingham Palace was robbed.
Of this class was the ingenious yet peculiarly simple robbery effected at the house of Lord Fitzgerald in Belgrave Square.
The butler, on the occasion of a death in the family, when the house was in some confusion, arranged with a burglar to come in,
and with another carry off the plate-chest in broad daylight, and as a matter of business. No one interfered or asked any questions.
The thief walked into the house in Belgrave Square, and openly carried off the plate-chest, deposited it in a light cart at the door, and drove away.
Howse, the steward, accused the other servants, but they retorted, declaring that he had been visited by the thief the day previous,
whom he had shown over the plate closet.
Howse and his accomplice were arrested; the former was found guilty and sentenced to fifteen years, but the latter was acquitted.
Stealing plate was about this period the crime of a more aristocratic thief.
The club spoons and other articles of plate were long a source of profitable income to a gentleman named Ashley,
who belonged to five good London clubs --
the Junior United Service, the Union, Reform, Colonial, and Erechtheum clubs.
When one of these clubs was taken in at the Army and Navy, that establishment also suffered.
Suspicion fell at length upon Ashley, who was seen to handle the forks and spoons at table in a strange manner.
A watch was set on his house, in Allington Street, Pimlico,
and one day a police constable tracked him to a silversmith's in Holborn Hill,
where Ashley produced four silver spoons, and begged that his initials might be engraved upon them.
Ashley was arrested as he left the shop; the spoons were impounded, and it was found that the club monogram had been erased from them.
On a search of the prisoner's lodgings in Allington Street, a silver fork was found,
a number of pawnbrokers' duplicates, and three small files. It was proved at the trial that Ashley had asked his landlady for brick-dust and leather,
and it was contended that these with the files were used to alter the marks on the plate.
At most of the clubs the servants had been mulcted to make good lost plate, which had no doubt been stolen by the prisoner.
Several pawnbrokers were subpoenaed and obliged to surrender plate, to the extent in some cases of a couple of dozen of spoons or forks,
which the various club secretaries identified as the property of their respective clubs.
Ashley was the son of an army agent and banker,
and many witnesses were brought to attest to his previous good character, but he was found guilty and sentenced to seven years' transportation.
A robbery of a somewhat novel kind was executed in rather a bungling fashion by Ker, a sea-captain,
whose ship brought home a mixed cargo from Bahia and other ports.
Part of the freight were four hundred rough diamonds valued at £4000.
These packages were consigned to Messrs. Shroeder of London; and as it was known that they were to arrive in Ker's ship,
one of the owners had met her at Deal, but the captain had already absconded with the packages of precious stones in his pocket.
Ker came at once to London, and, by the help of the landlord of a public-house in Smithfield and others, disposed of the whole of the diamonds.
A Jew named Benjamin effected the sale to certain merchants named Blogg and Martin,
who declared that the rough diamond market was in such a depressed condition that they could only afford to give £1750 for stones worth
four thousand pounds
The circumstances of this purchase of brilliants from a stranger at such an inadequate price was strongly commented upon at Ker's trial.
The moment it was discovered that the diamonds had disappeared, the affair was taken up by the police.
Forrester, the detective who had pursued and captured Burgess at Boston, tracked Ker to France, and following him there, eventually captured him
at Montreuil. He was arraigned at the Old Bailey, and the case fully proved. His sentence was seven years' transportation.
The gravest crimes continued at intervals to inspire the town with horror, and concentrate public attention upon the jail of Newgate,
and the murderers immured within its walls.
Courvoisier's case made a great stir. There was unusual atrocity in this murder of an aged, infirm gentleman,
a scion of the ducal house of Bedford, by his confidential valet and personal attendant.
Lord William Russell lived alone in Norfolk Street, Park Lane. He was a widower, and seventy-three years of age.
One morning in May his lordship was found dead in his bed with his throat cut.
The fact of the murder was first discovered by the housemaid,
who, on going down early, was surprised to find the dining-room in a state of utter confusion;
the furniture turned upside down, the drawers of the escritoire open and rifled,
a bundle lying on the floor, as though thieves had been interrupted in the act.
The housemaid summoned the cook, and both went to call the valet, Courvoisier,
who came from his room ready dressed, a suspicious circumstance, as he was always late in the morning.
The housemaid suggested that they should see if his lordship was all right, and the three went to his bedroom.
While Courvoisier opened the shutters, the housemaid, approaching the bed, saw that the pillow was saturated with blood.
The discovery of the murdered man immediately followed. The neighborhood was alarmed, the police sent for, and a close inquiry forthwith commenced.
That Lord William Russell had committed suicide was at once declared impossible.
It was also clearly proved that no forcible entry had been made into the house;
the fresh marks of violence upon the door had evidently been made inside, and not from outside;
moreover, the instruments, poker and chisel, by which they had no doubt been effected,
were found in the butler's pantry, used by Courvoisier.
The researches of the police soon laid bare other suspicious facts.
The bundle found in the dining-room contained, with clothes, various small articles of plate and jewelery which a thief would probably have put into his pocket.
Upstairs in the bedroom a rouleaux box for sovereigns had been broken open,
also the jewel-box and note-case, from the latter of which was abstracted a ten-pound note known to have been in the possession of the deceased.
His lordship's watch was gone.
Further suspicion was caused by the position of a book and a wax candle by the bedside.
The latter was so placed that it could throw no light on the former, which was a 'Life of Sir Samuel Romilly.'
The intention of the real murderer to shift the crime to burglars was evident although futile,
and the police, feeling convinced that the crime had been committed by some inmate of the house,
took Courvoisier into custody, and placed the two female servants under surveillance.
The valet's strange demeanor had attracted attention from the first.
He had hung over the body in a state of dreadful agitation, answering no questions, and taking no part in the proceedings.
Three days later a close search of the butler's pantry produced fresh circumstantial evidence.
Behind the skirting board several of his lordship's rings were discovered;
near it was his Waterloo medal, and the above-mentioned ten-pound note.
Further investigation was rewarded by the discovery in the pantry of a split gold ring, used by Lord William to carry his keys on;
next, and in the same place, a chased gold key;
and at last his lordship's watch was found secreted under the leads of the sink.
All this was evidence sufficient to warrant Courvoisier's committal for trial;
but still he found friends, and a liberal subscription was raised among the foreign servants in London to provide funds for his defense.
Courvoisier, when put on his trial, pleaded not guilty;
but on the second day the discovery of fresh evidence, more particularly the recovery of some of Lord William's stolen plate,
induced the prisoner to make a full confession of his crime to the lawyers who defended him.
This placed them in a position of much embarrassment. To have thrown up their brief would have been to have secured Courvoisier's conviction.
Mr. Phillips, who led in the case, went to the other extreme,
and in an impassioned address implored the jury not to send an innocent man to the gallows.
It will be remembered that the question whether Mr. Phillips had not exceeded the limits usually allowed to counsel was much debated at the time.
The jury without hesitation found Courvoisier guilty, and he was sentenced to death.
The prisoner's demeanor had greatly changed during the trial.
Coolness amounting almost to effrontery gave way to hopeless dejection.
On his removal to Newgate after sentence,
he admitted that he had been justly convicted, and expressed great anxiety that his fellow-servants should be relieved from all suspicion.
Later in the day he tried to commit suicide by cramming a towel down his throat, but was prevented.
Next morning he made a full confession in presence of his attorney, and the governor, Mr. Cope.
In this he gave as the motives of his crime a quarrel he had with his master, who threatened to discharge him without a character.
Lord William, according to the valet, was of a peevish, difficult temper;
he was annoyed with his man for various small omissions and acts of forgetfulness, and on the night of the murder had taken Courvoisier to task rather sharply.
Finally, on coming downstairs after bed-time, Lord William had found Courvoisier in the dining-room.
"What are you doing here?" asked his lordship.
"You can have no good intentions; you must quit my service tomorrow morning."
This seems to have decided Courvoisier,
who took a carving-knife from the sideboard in the dining-room, went upstairs to Lord William's bedroom, and drew the knife across his throat.
"He appeared to die instantly," said the murderer, in conclusion.
His account of his acts and movements after the deed
varied so considerably in the several documents he left behind, that too much reliance cannot be placed upon his confession.
His last statement contains the words, "The public now think I am a liar, and they will not believe me when I say the truth."
This was no doubt the case, but this much truth his confession may be taken to contain:
that Courvoisier was idle, discontented, ready to take offense, greedy of gain;
that he could not resist the opportunity for robbery offered him by his situation at Lord William Russell's; that when vexed with his master
he did not shrink from murder, both for revenge and to conceal his other crimes.
Courvoisier wished to commit suicide in Newgate, but was prevented by the vigilant supervision to which he was subjected while in jail.
The attempt was to have been made by opening a vein and allowing himself to bleed to death.
The Sunday night before his execution he would not go to bed when ordered.
The governor insisted, but Courvoisier showed great reluctance to strip.
The order was, however, at length obeyed, and the whole of the prisoner's clothes were minutely searched.
Courvoisier admitted that he had intended to bind it tightly round his arm and bleed himself to death in the night.
The next inquiry was how he hoped to open a vein. "With a bit of sharpened stick picked out of the ordinary firewood."
"Where is it?" asked the governor.
The prisoner replied that he had left it in the mattress of which he had just been deprived.
The bed was searched, but no piece of sharpened wood was found. It was thought that it might have been lost in changing the mattresses.
The cloth above referred to belonged to the inner seam of his trousers, which he had managed to tear out.
There is nothing to show that Courvoisier really contemplated self-destruction.
A murder which reproduced many of the features of that committed by Greenacre soon followed, and excited the public mind even more than that of Courvoisier's.
Daniel Good's crime might have remained long undiscovered but for his own careless stupidity.
He was coachman to a gentleman at Roehampton. One day he went into a pawnbroker's at Wandsworth, and bought a pair of breeches on credit.
At the same time he was seen to steal and secrete a pair of trousers. The shop-boy gave information.
Good was followed to his stables by a policeman, but obstinately denied the theft.
The policeman insisted on searching the premises, at which Good displayed some uneasiness.
This increased when the officer, accompanied by two others, a neighbor and a bailiff, entered one of the stables.
Good now offered to go to Wandsworth and satisfy the pawnbroker.
Just at this moment, however, the searchers found concealed under two trusses of hay a woman's headless and dismembered trunk.
At the constable's cry of alarm Good rushed from the stable and locked the door behind him.
Some time elapsed before the imprisoned party could force open the doors, and by then the fugitive had escaped.
Medical assistance having been summoned, it was ascertained how the dismemberment had been effected.
At the same time an overpowering odor attracted them to the adjoining harness-room, where the missing remains were raked out
half consumed in the ashes of a wood fire.
In the same room a large axe and saw were found covered with blood.
Inquiry into the character of Good exposed him as a loose liver, who "kept company" with several women.
One called his sister, but supposed to be his wife, had occupied a room in South Street, Manchester Square,
with a son of Good's by a former wife. Another wife, real or fictitious, existed in Spitalfields,
and evidence was given of close relation between Good and a third woman, a girl named Butcher, residing at Woolwich.
The victim was the first of these three.
Good had told her, much to her perturbation, that she was to move from South Street to Roehampton, and one day he fetched her.
They were seen together on Barnes Common, and again in Putney Park Lane, where they were talking loud and angrily.
The poor creature was never seen again alive.
The actual method of the murder was never exactly ascertained.
Good himself remained at large for some weeks. He had tramped as far as Tunbridge, where he obtained work as a bricklayer's laborer;
he there gave satisfaction for industry, but he was taciturn, and would hold no converse with his fellows.
The woman where he lodged noticed that he was very restless at night, moaning and sighing much. Detection came unexpectedly.
He was recognized by an ex-policeman who had known him at Roehampton, and immediately arrested.
In his effects were found the clothes he had on at the time of his escape from the stables, and under the jacket he was wearing
was a piece of a woman's calico apron stained with blood, which he had used to save the pressure on his shoulder by the hod.
Good was committed to Newgate, and tried at the Central Criminal Court before a crowded court.
He made a rambling defense, ending by saying,
Good ladies and gentlemen all, I have a great deal more to say, but I am so bad I cannot say it.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 17: Newgate notorieties continued, part 2.
Hocker's murder is in its way interesting, as affording another proof of the extraordinary way in which the culprit returned to the scene of his guilt.
The cries of his victim, a Mr. Delarue,
brought passers-by and policemen to the spot, a lonely place near a dead wall beyond Belsize Hall, Hampstead,
but too late to give substantial aid.
While the body lay there still warm, battered and bleeding from the cruel blows inflicted upon him by his cowardly assailant, a man came by singing.
He entered into conversation with the policemen, and learnt, as it seemed for the first time, what had happened.
His remark was, "It is a nasty job;" he took hold of the dead hand, and confessed that he felt "queer" at the shocking sight.
This sight was his own handiwork,
yet he could not overcome the strange fascination it had for him, and remained by the side of the corpse till the stretcher came.
Even then he followed it as far as Belsize Lane.
It was here that the others engaged in their dismal office in removing the dead first got a good look at the stranger's face.
He wanted a light for a cigar, and got it from a lantern which was lifted up and fully betrayed his features.
It was noticed that he wore a mackintosh. Next day the police, in making a careful search of the scene of the murder,
picked up a coat-button, which afterwards played an important part in the identification of the murderer.
A letter, which afforded an additional clue, was also found in the pocket of the deceased. Still it was many weeks before any arrest was made.
In the mean time the police were not idle.
It came out by degrees that the person who had been seen in Belsize Lane on the night the body was found was a friend of the deceased.
His name was Hocker; he was by trade a ladies' shoemaker; and it was also ascertained that after the day of the murder he was flush of money.
a coat among them much torn and stained, with three buttons missing, one of which corresponded with that picked up at Hampstead.
The letter found in the pocket of the deceased was sealed with a wafer marked F,
and many of the same sort were found in the possession of the accused. This was enough to obtain a committal,
after several remands; but the case contained elements of doubt, and the evidence at the trial was entirely circumstantial.
A witness deposed to meeting Hocker, soon after the cries of murder were heard,
running at a dog-trot into London, and others swore that they plainly recognized him as the man seen soon afterwards in the lane.
A woman whom he called on the same evening declared he had worn a mackintosh, his coat was much torn, there was a stain of blood on his shirt-cuff,
and he was in possession, the first time to her knowledge, of a watch.
This was Delarue's watch, fully identified as such, which Hocker told his brother Delarue had given him the morning of the murder.
These were damnatory facts which well supported the prosecution.
The prisoner made an elaborate defense, in which he sought to vilify the character of deceased
as the seducer of an innocent girl to whom he (Hocker) had been fondly attached.
When her ruin was discovered her brother panted for revenge.
Hocker, whose skill in counterfeiting handwriting was known, was asked to fabricate a letter making an assignation with Delarue
in a lonely part of Hampstead.
Hocker and the brother went to the spot, where the latter left him to meet his sister's seducer alone.
Soon afterwards Hocker heard cries of "murder,"
and proceeding to where they came from, found Delarue dead, slain by the furious brother.
Hocker was so overcome, feeling himself the principal cause of the tragedy,
that he rushed to a slaughterhouse in Hampstead and purposely stained his clothes with blood.
Such an extravagant defense did not weigh with judge or jury;
the first summed up dead against the prisoner, and the latter, after retiring for ten minutes, found him guilty.
Hocker's conduct in Newgate while under sentence of death was most extraordinary.
He drew up several long statements, containing narratives purely fictitious, imputing crimes to his victim, and repeating his line of defense
that Delarue had suffered by the hands of imaginary outraged brothers acting as the avengers of females deeply injured by him.
Hocker made several pretended confessions and revelations, all of which were proved to be absolutely false by the police on inquiry.
His demeanor was a strange compound of wickedness, falsehood, and deceit.
But at the fatal hour his hardihood forsook him, and he was almost insensible when taken out of his cell for execution.
Restoratives were applied, but he was in a fainting condition when tied, and had to be supported by the assistant executioner
while Calcraft adjusted the noose.
There was an epidemic of murder in the United Kingdom about 1848 to 9.
In November of the first-named year occurred the wholesale slaughter of the Jermys in their house, Stanfield Hall, by the miscreant Rush.
Soon afterwards, in Gloucestershire,
Next year John Gleeson Wilson, at Liverpool, murdered a woman, Ann Henrichson, also a maidservant and two children;
while in Ireland a wife dashed out her husband's brains with a hammer.
London did not escape the contagion, and prominent among the detestable crimes of the period stands that of the Mannings at Bermondsey.
These great criminals suffered at Horsemonger Lane Jail, but they were tried at the Central Criminal Court, and were for some time inmates of Newgate.
Their victim was a man named Patrick O'Connor, a Custom-House gauger, who had been a suitor of Marie de Roux before she became Mrs. Manning.
Marie de Roux up to the time of her marriage had been in service as lady's maid to Lady Blantyre, daughter of the Duchess of Sutherland,
and Manning hoped to get some small Government appointment through his wife's interest.
He had failed in this as well as in the business of a publican, which he had at one time adopted.
After the marriage a close intimacy was still maintained between O'Connor and the Mannings.
He lived at Mile End, whence he walked often to call at 3, Minver Place, Bermondsey, the residence of his old love.
O'Connor was a man of substance. He had long followed the profitable trade of a money-lender,
and by dint of usurious interest on small sums advanced to needy neighbors, had amassed as much as eight thousand pounds or ten thousand pounds.
His wealth was well known to "Maria," as he called Mrs. Manning, who made several ineffectual attempts to get money out of him.
At last this fiendish woman made up her mind to murder O'Connor and appropriate all his possessions.
Her husband, to whom she coolly confided her intention,
a heavy brutish fellow, was yet aghast at his wife's resolve, and tried hard to dissuade her from bad purpose.
In his confession after sentence he declared that she plied him well with brandy at this period,
and that during the whole time he was never in his right senses.
Meanwhile this woman, unflinching in her cold, bloody determination, carefully laid all her plans for the consummation of the deed.
One fine afternoon in August, O'Connor was met walking in the direction of Bermondsey.
He was dressed with particular care, as he was to dine at the Mannings and meet friends, one a young lady.
He was seen afterwards smoking and talking with his hosts in their back parlor, and never seen again alive.
It came out in the husband's confession that Mrs. Manning induced O'Connor to go down to the kitchen to wash his hands, that she followed him to the basement,
that she stood behind him as he stood near the open grave she herself had dug for him,
and which he mistook for a drain, and that while he was speaking to her she put the muzzle of a pistol close to the back of his head and shot him down.
She ran upstairs, told her husband, made him go down to look at her handiwork, and as O'Connor was not quite dead,
Manning gave the coup de grace with a crowbar.
After this Mrs. Manning changed her dress and went off in a cab to O'Connor's lodgings,
which, having possessed herself of the murdered man's keys, she rifled from end to end.
Returning to her own home, where Manning meantime had been calmly smoking and talking to the neighbors over the basement wall,
the corpse lying just inside the kitchen all the while, the two set to work to strip the body and hide it under the stones of the floor.
This job was not completed till the following day, as the hole had to be enlarged, and the only tool they had was a dust-shovel.
A quantity of quicklime was thrown in with the body to destroy all identification.
This was on a Thursday evening.
For the remainder of that week and part of the next the murderers stayed in the house, and occupied the kitchen, close to the remains of their victim.
On the Sunday Mrs. Manning roasted a goose at this same kitchen fire, and ate it with relish in the afternoon.
This cold-blooded indifference after the event was only outdone by the premeditation of this horrible murder.
The hole must have been excavated and the quicklime purchased quite three weeks before O'Connor met his death,
and during that time he must frequently have stood or sat over his own grave.
Discovery of the murder came in this wise. O'Connor, a punctual and well-conducted official, was at once missed at the London Docks.
On the third day his friends began to inquire for him,
and at their request two police officers were sent to Bermondsey to inquire for him at the Mannings, with whom it was well known that he was very intimate.
The Mannings had seen or heard nothing of him, of course. As O'Connor still did not turn up, the police after a couple of days returned to Minver Place.
The house was empty, bare and stripped of all its furniture, and its former occupants had decamped.
The circumstance was suspicious, and a search was at once made of the whole premises.
In the back kitchen one of the detectives remarked that the cement between certain stones looked lighter than the rest, and on trying it with a knife,
The stones were at once taken up;
Six inches lower the body of O'Connor was uncovered.
He was lying on his face, his legs tied up to his hips so as to allow of the body fitting into the hole.
The lime had done its work so rapidly that the features would have been indistinguishable but for the prominent chin and a set of false teeth.
The corpse settled all doubts, and the next point was to lay hands upon the Mannings.
It was soon ascertained that the wife had gone off in a cab with a quantity of luggage.
Part of this she had deposited to be left till called for at one station, while she had gone herself to another, that at Euston Square.
At the first the boxes were impounded, opened, and found to contain many of O'Connor's effects.
At the second exact information was obtained of Mrs. Manning's movements. She had gone to Edinburgh.
A telegraphic message, then newly adapted to the purposes of criminal detection,
advised the Edinburgh police of the whole affair, and within an hour an answer was telegraphed, stating that Mrs. Manning was in custody.
She had been to brokers to negotiate the sale of certain foreign railway stock, with which they had been warned from London not to deal,
and they had given information to the police.
Her arrest was planned, and, when the telegram arrived from London, completed.
An examination of her boxes disclosed a quantity of O'Connor's property.
Mrs. Manning was transferred to London and lodged in the Horsemonger Lane Jail, where her husband soon afterwards joined her.
He had fled to Jersey, where he was recognized and arrested.
Each tried to throw the blame on the other; Manning declared his wife had committed the murder, Mrs. Manning indignantly denied the charge.
The prisoners were in due course transferred to Newgate, to be put upon their trial at the Central Criminal Court.
A great number of distinguished people assembled as usual at the Old Bailey on the day of trial.
The Mannings were arraigned together; the husband standing at one of the front corners of the dock, his wife at the other end.
Manning, who was dressed in black, appeared to be a heavy, bull-necked, repulsive-looking man, with a very fair complexion and light hair.
Mrs. Manning was not without personal charms;
her face was comely, she had dark hair and good eyes, and was above the middle height, yet inclined to be stout.
She was smartly dressed in a plaid shawl, a white lace cap;
her hair was dressed in long crepe bands. She had lace ruffles at her wrist, and wore primrose-colored kid gloves.
The case rested upon the facts which have been already set forth, and was proved to the satisfaction of the jury, who brought in a verdict of guilty.
Manning, when sentence of death was passed on him, said nothing;
but Mrs. Manning, speaking in a foreign accent, addressed the court with great fluency and vehemence.
She complained that she had no justice; there was no law for her, she had found no protection either from judges, the prosecutor, or her husband.
She had not been treated like a Christian, but like a wild beast of the forest. She declared that the money found in her possession had been sent her from abroad;
that O'Connor had been more to her than her husband, that she ought to have married him.
It was against common sense to charge her with murdering the only friend she had in the world;
the culprit was really her husband, who killed O'Connor out of jealousy and revengeful feelings.
When the judge assumed the black cap
Mrs. Manning became still more violent, shouting, "No, no, I will not stand it! You ought to be ashamed of yourselves!"
and would have left the dock had not Mr. Cope, the governor of Newgate, restrained her.
After judgment was passed she repeatedly cried out Shame!
and stretching out her hand, she gathered up a quantity of the rue which, following ancient custom dating from the days of the jail fever,
was strewn in front of the dock, and sprinkled it towards the bench with a contemptuous gesture.
On being removed to Newgate from the court Mrs. Manning became perfectly furious.
She uttered loud imprecations, cursing judge, jury, barristers, witnesses, and all who stood around.
They had to handcuff her by force against the most violent resistance, and still she raged and stormed,
shaking her clenched and manacled hands in the officers' faces.
From Newgate the Mannings were taken in separate cabs to Horsemonger Lane Jail.
On this journey her manner changed completely. She became flippant, joked with the officers, asked how they liked her "resolution" in the dock,
and expressed the utmost contempt for her husband, whom she never intended to acknowledge or speak to again.
Later her mood changed to abject despair.
On reaching the condemned cell she threw herself upon the floor and shrieked in an hysterical agony of tears.
After this, until the day of execution, she recovered her spirits, and displayed reckless effrontery,
mocking at the chaplain, and turning a deaf ear to the counsels of a benevolent lady who came to visit.
Now she abused the jury, now called Manning a vagabond,
and through all ate heartily at every meal, slept soundly at nights, and talked with cheerfulness on almost any subject.
Nevertheless, she attempted to commit suicide by driving her nails, purposely left long, into her throat.
She was discovered just as she was getting black in the face.
Manning's demeanor was more in harmony with his situation, and the full confession he made
elucidated all dark and uncertain points in connection with the crime.
The actual execution, which took place at another prison than Newgate, is rather beyond the scope of this work.
But it may be mentioned that the concourse was so enormous that it drew down the well-merited and trenchant disapproval of Charles Dickens,
who wrote to the 'Times,' saying that he believed "a sight so inconceivably awful
as the wickedness and levity of the immense crowd collected at the execution this morning could be imagined by no man,
and presented by no heathen land under the sun.
faded in my mind before the atrocious bearing, looks, and language of the assembled spectators.
When I came upon the scene at midnight, the shrillness of the cries and howls that were raised from time to time,
denoting that they came from a concourse of boys and girls already assembled in the best places, made my blood run cold.
It will be in the memory of many that Mrs. Manning appeared on the scaffold in a black satin dress, which was bound tightly round her waist.
This preference brought the costly stuff into disrepute, and its unpopularity lasted for nearly thirty years.
I will briefly describe one or two of the more remarkable murders in the years immediately following, then pass on to another branch of crime.
Robert Marley at the time of his arrest called himself a surgical instrument maker.
It was understood also that he had served in the army as a private, and had, moreover, undergone a sentence of transportation.
But it was supposed that he had been once in a good position, well born, and well educated.
When lying under sentence of death in Newgate, he was visited by a lady, a gentlewoman in every sense of the word, who was said to be his sister.
His determined addiction to evil courses had led to his being cast off by his family,
and he must have been at the end of his resources when he committed the crime for which he suffered.
His offense was the murder of Richard Cope,
a working jeweler, shopman to a Mr. Berry of Parliament Street. It was Cope's duty to stay in the shop till the last, close the shutters,
secure the stock of watches and jewelry, then lock up the place and take on the keys to Mr. Berry's private house in Pimlico.
Cope, a small man, crippled, and of weakly constitution, was alone in the shop about 9:30.
the shutters were up, and he was preparing to close, when Marley entered and fell upon him with a life-preserver,
meaning to kill him and rifle the shop.
The noise of the struggle was heard outside in the street,
and bystanders peeped in through the shutters, but no one entered or sought to interfere in what seemed only a domestic quarrel.
A milliner's porter,
Lerigo, was also attracted by the noise of the row, but after walking a few paces he felt dissatisfied, and returned to the spot.
Pushing the shop-door open, he saw Marley finishing his murderous assault.
Lerigo turned for assistance to take the man into custody.
Marley, disturbed, picked up a cigar and parcel from the counter, then ran out, pursued by Lerigo only.
Marley ran along the street, down into Cannon Row
then into Palace Yard, where the waterman of the cab-tank, in obedience to Lerigo's shouts, collared the fugitive.
Escorted by his two captors, Marley was taken back into Parliament Street to the jeweler's shop.
The policemen were now in possession;
two of them supported Cope, who was still alive, although insensible, and Marley was apprehended. The evidence against him was completed
by his identification by Cope in Westminster Hospital, who survived long enough to make a formal deposition before Mr. Jardine,
the police magistrate, that Marley was the man who had beaten him to death.
Marley at his trial was undefended, and the sheriffs offered him counsel; but he declined. The witnesses against him all spoke the truth, he said;
there was no case to make out; why waste money on lawyers for the defense? His demeanor was cool and collected throughout;
he seemed while in Newgate to realize thoroughly that there was no hope for him, and was determined to face his fate bravely.
After sentence, the Newgate officers who had special charge of him noticed that he slept well and ate well, enjoying all his meals.
One of them went into his cell just at dinner-time;
the great clock of St. Sepulchre's close by was striking the hour, and Marley, who had his elbows on the table,
with his head resting on his hands, looked up and observed calmly, "Go along, clock; come along, gallows."
On the dread morning he came out to execution quite gaily, and tripped up the stairs to the scaffold.
His captors, it may be added (Lerigo and Allen), were warmly commended by the judge for their courage and activity.
The former was given a reward of twenty and the latter of ten pounds.
A murderous assault on a police constable, which so nearly ended fatally that the culprit was sentenced to death, although not executed,
was perpetrated in 1852. The case was accompanied with the most shocking brutality.
Cannon, by trade a chimney-sweep, had long been characterized by the bitterest hatred of the police force,
and had been repeatedly sentenced to imprisonment for most desperate and ferocious attacks upon various constables. His last victim was Dwyer,
a fine young officer who had been summoned to take Cannon into custody when the latter was drunk and riotous in front of a public-house.
Dwyer found Cannon bleeding profusely from a wound in the head, and persuaded him to go to a doctor's.
They walked together quietly for some little distance, then Cannon, without the slightest warning,
threw the constable on his back, and violently assaulted him by jumping on his chest and stomach,
and by getting his hand inside Dwyer's stock, with the idea of strangling him.
Dwyer managed to overpower his assailant, and got to his feet; but Cannon butted at him with his head, and again threw him to the ground,
after which he kicked his prostrate foe in the most brutal and cowardly manner, and until he was almost senseless, and bruised from head to foot.
Once more Dwyer got to his feet, and managed, by drawing his staff, to keep Cannon at bay until a second constable came to his aid.
All this time not one of a numerous body of bystanders offered to assist the policeman in his extremity.
On the contrary, many of them encouraged the brutal assailant in his savage attack.
To Cannon's infinite surprise, he was indicted for attempt to murder, and not for a simple assault, and found guilty.
The judge, in passing sentence of death, told him he richly deserved the punishment.
As Dwyer survived, Cannon escaped the death sentence, which was commuted to penal servitude for life.
A handsome sum was subscribed for the injured constable, who was disabled for life.
Only a few have vied with Cannon in fiendish cruelty and brutality.
One of these was Mobbs, who lived in the Minories,
generally known by the soubriquet of "General Haynau," a name execrated in England about this time.
Mobbs systematically ill-used his wife for a long space of time, and at last cut her throat.
For this he was executed in front of Newgate in 1833.
Emmanuel Barthelemy again,
the French refugee, was a murderer of the same description, who dispatched his victim with a loaded cane, after which, to secure his escape,
he shot an old soldier who had attempted to detain him. He was convicted and executed.
He died impenitent, declaring that he had no belief, and that it was idle to ask forgiveness of God.
I want forgiveness of man; I want those doors (of the prison) opened.
Barthelemy was generally supposed to have been a secret agent of the French police.
I will now pass to grave but less atrocious crimes.
In 1850 occurred the first of a series of gigantic frauds,
which followed each other at no long intervals, which had a strong family likeness, and originated all of them to make money easily,
without capital, and at railroad speed.
Walter Watts was an inventor, a creator, who struck an entirely new and original line of crime.
Employed as a clerk in the Globe Assurance,
he with unusual quickness of apprehension discovered and promptly turned to account an inexcusably lax system of management,
which offered peculiar chances of profit to an ingenious and unscrupulous man.
It was the custom in this office to make the banker's passbook the basis of the entries in the company's ledgers.
Thus, when a payment was made by the company, the amount disbursed was carried to account in the general books from its entry in the passbook,
and without reference to or comparison with the documents in which the payment was claimed.
This passbook, when not at the bank, was in the exclusive custody of Watts.
The cheques drawn by the directors also passed through his hands; to him too they came back to be verified and put by,
after they had been cashed by the bank.
In this way Watts had complete control over the whole of the monetary transactions of the company.
He could do what he liked with the passbook, and by its adoption, as described as the basis of all entries,
there was no independent check upon him if he chose to tamper with it.
This he did to an enormous extent,
continually altering, erasing, and adding figures to correspond with and cover the abstractions he made of various cheques as they were drawn.
It seems incredible that this passbook, which when produced in court
was a mass of blots and erasures, should not have created suspicion of foul play either at the bank or at the company's board.
Implicit confidence appears to have been placed in Watts, who was the son of an old and trusted employee, and, moreover, a young man of plausible address.
Watts led two lives.
In the West End he was a man of fashion, with a town house, a house at Brighton, and a cellar full of good wine at both.
He rode a priceless hack in Rotten Row, or drove down to Richmond in a mail phaeton and pair.
He played high, and spent his nights at the club, or in joyous and dissolute company.
Under his auspices several "stars" appeared on the boards of the Marylebone theatre,
and later he became manager of the newly rebuilt Olympic at Wych Street.
No one cared too closely to inquire into the sources of wealth. Some said he was a fortunate speculator in stocks,
others that he had had extraordinary luck as a gold-digger. Had his West End and little-informed associates followed him into the city,
whither he was taken every morning in a smart brougham, they would have seen him alight from it in Cornhill,
and walk forward on foot to enter as a humble and unpretending employee the doors of the Globe Assurance office.
Nevertheless, in this position, through the culpable carelessness which left him unfettered, he managed between 1844
The detection of these frauds came while he was still prominently before the world as the lessee of the Olympic.
Rumors were abroad that serious defalcations had been discovered in one of the insurance offices,
but it was long before the public realized that the fraudulent clerk and the great theatrical manager were one and the same person.
Watts's crime was discovered by the secretary of the Globe Company, who came suddenly upon the extensive falsification of the passbook.
An inquiry was at once set on foot, and the frauds were traced to Watts.
The latter, when first taxed with his offense, protested his innocence boldly, and positively denied all knowledge of the affair;
and he had so cleverly destroyed all traces that it was not easy to bring home the charge.
But it was proved that Watts had appropriated one cheque for £1400,
which he had paid into his own bankers, and on this he was committed to Newgate for trial.
There were two counts in the indictment: one for stealing a cheque value £1400, the second for stealing a bit of paper value one penny.
The jury found him guilty of the latter only, with a point of law reserved. This was fully argued before three judges,
and not for the slight offense as it appeared on the record.
The sentence of the court, one of ten years' transportation, struck the prisoner with dismay.
He had been led to suppose that twelve months' imprisonment was the utmost the law could inflict, and he broke down utterly under the unexpected blow.
That same evening he committed suicide in Newgate.
The details of the suicide were given at the inquest. Watts had been in ill-health from the time of his first arrest.
In Giltspur Street Compter, where he was first lodged
he showed symptoms of delirium tremens, and admitted that he had been addicted to the excessive use of stimulants.
His health improved, but was still indifferent when he was brought up for sentence, and he was an occupant of the Newgate infirmary.
He returned from court in a state of gloomy dejection,
and in the middle of the night one of the fellow-prisoners who slept in the same ward noticed that he was not in his bed.
This man got up to look for him, and found him hanging from the bars of a neighboring room.
He had made use of a piece of rope cut out from the sacking of his bedstead, and had tied his feet together with a silk pocket-handkerchief.
The prison officers were called, but Watts was quite cold and stiff when he was cut down.
Strange to say, a second suicide occurred in Newgate the same night,
that of a prize-fighter named Donovan, tried the same day, and convicted of manslaughter.
Sentence of death had been recorded against Donovan, who, like Watts, had seemingly been overcome with sudden despair.
In 1853 a second case of gigantic fraud alarmed and scandalized the financial world.
It outshone the defalcations of Watts.
Nothing to equal the excitement caused by the forgeries of Robert Ferdinand Pries had been known before in the city of London.
He was a corn merchant who operated largely in grain.
So enormous were his transactions, that they often affected the markets, and caused great fluctuations in prices.
These had been attributed to political action; some thought that the large purchases in foreign grains, effected at losing prices,
were intended by the protectionists to depress the wheat market, and secure the support of the farmers at the forthcoming election;
others, that Napoleon III., but recently proclaimed Emperor of the French, wished to gain the popularity necessary to secure the people.
Few realized that these mysterious operations were the "convulsive attempt" of a ruined and dishonest speculator to sustain his credit.
Pries, although enjoying a high reputation in the city, had long been in a bad way.
His method was to obtain advances twice over on the same bills of lading or corn warrants. The duplicates were forged.
In this way he obtained vast sums from several firms, and one to which he was indebted upwards of £50,000 subsequently stopped payment.
Pries at length was discovered
through a dishonored cheque for £3000, paid over as an installment of £18,000 owing for an advance on warrants.
Inquiries were instituted when the cheque was protested, which led to the discovery of the forgeries.
Pries was lodged in Newgate, tried at the Old Bailey, and transported for life.
Another set of frauds, which resembled those of Pries in principle, although not in practice, were soon afterwards discovered.
proposed to gain the capital he needed for business purposes by raising money on dock warrants for imported goods which had no real existence.
When such goods arrived they were frequently left at a wharf, paying rent until it suited the importer to remove them.
The dock warrant was issued by the wharfinger as certificate that he held the goods.
The warrant thus represented money, and was often used as such, being endorsed and passed from hand to hand as other negotiable bills.
Cole's plan was to have a wharf of his own, nominally occupied by a creature trading as Maltby and Co.
Goods would be landed at this wharf;
Maltby and Co. would issue warrants on them deliverable to the importer, and the goods were then passed to be stored in neighboring warehouses.
The owners of the latter would then issue a second set of warrants on these goods, in total ignorance of the fact that they were already pledged.
Cole quickly raised money on both sets of warrants. He carried on this game for some time with great success,
and so developed his business that in one year his transactions amounted to a couple of millions of pounds.
He had several narrow escapes.
Once a warrant-holder sent down a clerk to view certain goods, and the clerk found that these goods had already a "stop" upon them, or were pledged.
Cole escaped by throwing the blame on a careless partner, and at once removed the "stop."
Again, some of the duplicate and fictitious warrants were held by a firm which suspended payment, and there was no knowing into whose hands they might fall.
Cole found out where they were, and redeemed them at a heavy outlay, thus obtaining business relations with the firm that held them,
which were soon developed, much to that firm's subsequent anger and regret.
Last of all, the well-known bankers Overend and Gurney, whose own affairs created much excitement some years later,
wishing to verify the value of warrants they held, and sending to Maltby and Co.'s wharf, found out half the truth.
These bankers, wishing for more specific information,
asked Davidson and Gordon, a firm with which Cole was closely allied, whether the warrants meant goods or nothing.
They could not deny that the latter was the truth, and were forthwith stigmatized by Mr. Chapman, Overend and Gurney's representative, as rogues.
Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 18: Newgate notorieties continued, part 3.
The course of the swindlers was by no means smooth, but it was not till 1854 that suspicion arose that anything was wrong.
A firm which held a lot of warrants suddenly demanded the delivery of the goods they covered.
The goods having no existence, Cole of course could not deliver them.
About this time Davidson and Gordon, the people above-mentioned,
who had fraudulent warrants out of their own to the extent of £150,000, suspended payment and absconded.
This affected Cole's credit, and ugly reports were in circulation charging him with the issue of simulated warrants.
These indeed were out to the value of £367,800.
Cole's difficulties increased more and more; warrant-holders came down upon him demanding to realize their goods.
Cole now suspended payment.
Maltby, who had bolted, was pursued and arrested, to end his life miserably by committing suicide in a Newgate cell.
Cole too was apprehended, and in due course tried at the Central Criminal Court.
He was found guilty, and sentenced to the seemingly inadequate punishment of four years' transportation.
Davidson and Gordon were also sentenced to imprisonment.
A more distressing case stands next on the criminal records --
the failure and subsequent sentence of the bankers Messrs. Strahan, Paul, and Bates,
for the fraudulent disposal of securities lodged in their hands. This firm was one of the oldest banking establishments in the kingdom,
and dated back to the Commonwealth, when, under the title of Snow and Walton, it carried on business as pawnbrokers.
The Strahan of the firm which came to grief was a Snow who changed his name for a fortune of £200,000;
he was a man esteemed and respected in society and the world of finance, incapable as it was thought of a dishonest deed.
Sir John Dean Paul had inherited a baronetcy from his father, together with an honored name;
he was himself a prominent member of the Low Church, of austere piety, active in all good works.
Mr. Bates had been confidential managing clerk, and was taken into the firm not alone as a reward for long and faithful service
but that he might strengthen it by his long experience and known business capacity.
The bank enjoyed an excellent reputation, it had a good connection, and was supposed to be perfectly sound.
Moreover, the partners were sober, steady men, who paid unremitting attention to business.
Yet even so early as the death of the first Sir John Paul,
the bank was insolvent, and instead of starting on a fresh life with a new name, it should then and there have closed its doors.
In December 1851 the balance sheet showed a deficiency of upwards of £70,000.
The bank had been conducted on false principles;
it had assumed enormous responsibilities -- on one side by the ownership of the Mostyn collieries, a valueless property,
and on the other by backing up
an impecunious and rotten firm of contractors with vast liabilities and pledged to impossible works abroad.
The engagements of the bank on these two heads amounting to nearly half a million of money,
produced immediate embarrassment and financial distress.
The bank was already insolvent,
and the partners had to decide between suspending payment or continuing to hold its head above water by flagitious processes.
They chose, unhappily for themselves, the latter alternative.
Money they must have, and money they raised to meet their urgent necessities upon the balances and securities deposited with them by their customers.
This borrowing continued, and on such a scale that their paper was soon at a discount,
and the various discount houses would not advance sufficient sums to relieve the necessities of the bank.
Then it was that instead of merely pledging securities, the bank sold them outright, and thus passed the Rubicon of fraud.
This went on for some time, and might never have been discovered had some good stroke of luck provided any of the partners
with money enough to retrieve the position of the bank. But that passed from bad to worse;
the firm's paper went down further and further in value; an application to the Committee of Bankers for assistance was peremptorily refused,
then came a run on the bank, and it was compelled to stop payment.
Its debts amounted to three-quarters of a million, and the dividend it eventually paid was three and twopence in the pound.
But worse than the bankruptcy was the confession made by the partners in the court.
They admitted that they had made away with many of the securities entrusted to their keeping.
Following this, warrants were issued for their arrest,
the specific charge being the unlawful negotiation of Danish bonds and other shares belonging to the Rev. Dr. Griffiths of Rochester
to the value of £20,000.
Bates was at once captured in Norfolk Street, Strand.
Police officers went down at night to Nutfield, near Reigate, and arrested Sir John Paul, but allowed the prisoner to sleep there.
Next morning they only just saved the train to town, and left Sir John behind on the platform, but he subsequently surrendered himself.
Mr. Strahan was arrested at a friend's house in Bryanston Square.
All three were tried at the Central Criminal Court, and sentenced to fourteen years' transportation, passing some time in Newgate en route.
Bates, the least guilty, was pardoned in 1858.
Two cases of extensive embezzlement which were discovered almost simultaneously, those of Robson and Redpath,
will long be remembered both within and without the commercial world.
They both reproduced many of the features of the case of Watts, already described,
but in neither did the sums misappropriated reach quite the same high figure.
But neither Robson nor Redpath would have been able to pursue their fraudulent designs with success had they not, like Watts,
been afforded peculiar facilities by the slackness of system and the want of methodical administration in the concerns by which they were employed.
Robson was of humble origin, but he was well educated, and he had some literary abilities.
His proclivities were theatrical, and he was the author of several plays,
one at least of which, 'Love and Loyalty,' with Wallack in a leading part, achieved a certain success.
He began life as a law-writer, earning thereby some fifteen or eighteen shillings a week;
but the firm he served got him a situation as clerk in the office of the Great Northern Railway,
whence he passed to a better position under the Crystal Palace Company.
He now married, although his salary was only a pound a week; but he soon got on.
He had a pleasant address, showed good business aptitudes, and quickly acquired the approval of his superiors.
Within a year he was advanced to the post of chief clerk in the transfer department, at a salary of £150 a year.
His immediate chief was a Mr. Fasson, upon whose confidence he gained so rapidly, through his activity, industry, and engaging manners,
that ere long the whole management of the transfer department was entrusted to him.
Some time elapsed before Robson succumbed to temptation.
He was not the first man of loose morality and expensive tastes
who preferred to risk his future reputation and liberty to the present discomfort of living upon narrow means.
The temptation was all the greater because the chances of successful fraud lay ready to hand.
Shares in the company were represented by certificates, which often enough never left the company's, or more exactly Robson's, hands.
He conceived the idea of transferring shares, bogus shares from a person who held none, to any one who would buy them in the open market.
He took it for granted that the certificates representing these bogus shares, and which practically did not exist, would never be called for.
This ingenious method of raising funds he adopted and carried on without detection,
till the defalcations from fraudulent transfers and fraudulent issues combined amounted to £27,000.
With the proceeds of these flagitious frauds Robson feasted and made merry.
He kept open house at Kilburn Priory;
entertained literary, artistic, and dramatic celebrities; had a smart "turn out," attended all the race-meetings, and dressed in the latest fashion.
To his wife, poor soul, he made no pretense of fidelity, and she enjoyed only so much of his company as was necessarily spent
in receiving guests at home, or could be spared from two rival establishments in other parts of the town.
To account for his revenues he pretended to have been very lucky on the Stock Exchange, which was at one time true to a limited extent,
and to have succeeded in other speculations.
When his friends asked why he, a wealthy man of independent means, continued to slave on as a clerk on a pittance,
he replied gaily that his regular work at the Crystal Palace office was useful as a sort of discipline, and kept him steady.
All this time his position was one of extreme insecurity. He was standing over a mine which at any moment might explode.
The blow fell suddenly, and when least expected. One morning Mr. Fasson asked casually for certain certificates,
whether representing real or fictitious shares does not appear; but they were certificates connected in some way with Robson's long practiced frauds
and he could not produce them. His chief asked sternly where they were.
Robson said they were at Kilburn Priory.
"Let us go to Kilburn for them together," said Mr. Fasson, growing suspicious.
They drove there, and Robson on arrival did the honors of his house, rang for lunch to gain time,
but at Mr. Fasson's pressing demands went upstairs to fetch the certificates.
He came back to explain that he had mislaid them.
Mr. Fasson, more and more ill at ease, would not accept this subterfuge, and declared they must be found.
Robson again left him, but only to gather together hastily all the money and valuables on which he could lay his hands, with which he left the house.
Mr. Fasson waited and waited for his subordinate to re-appear, and at last discovered his flight.
A reward was forthwith offered for Robson's apprehension.
Meanwhile the absconding clerk had coolly driven to a favorite dining-place in the West End,
where a fish curry and a brace of partridges were set before him,
and he discussed the latter with appetite, but begged that they would never give him curry again, as he did not like it.
After dinner he went into hiding for a day or two,
then, accompanied by a lady, not Mrs. Robson, he took steamer and started for Copenhagen.
But the continental police had been warned to look out for him, and two Danish inspectors got upon his track,
followed him over to Sweden, and arrested him at Helsingfors.
Thence he was transferred to Copenhagen and surrendered in due course to a London police officer.
Little more remains to be said about Robson. He appears to have accepted his position, and to have at once resigned himself to his fate.
When brought to trial he took matters very coolly, and at first pleaded "Not Guilty," but subsequently withdrew the plea.
Sergeant Ballantine, who prosecuted,
paid him the compliment of describing him as "a young man of great intelligence, considerable powers of mind,
and possessed of an education very much beyond the rank of life to which he originally belonged."
Robson was found guilty, and sentenced to two terms of transportation, one for twenty and one for fourteen years.
Newgate officers who remember Robson still describe him as a fine young man, who behaved well as a prisoner,
but who had all the appearance of a careless, thoughtless, happy-go-lucky fellow.
In many respects the embezzlement of which Leopold Redpath was guilty closely resembled that of Robson,
but it was based upon more extended and audacious forgeries.
Redpath's crime arose from his peculiar and independent position as registrar of stock of the Great Northern Railway Company.
This offered him great facilities for the creation of artificial stock, its sale from a fictitious holder, and transfer to himself.
All the signatures in the transfer were forged. Not only did he thus transfer and realize "bogus" stock
but he bought bona fide amounts, and increased their value by altering the figures,
by inserting say 1 before 500, and thus making it
fifteen hundred pounds, which larger amount was duly carried to his credit on the register, and entered upon the certificates of transfer.
By these means Redpath misappropriated vast sums during a period extending over ten years.
The total amount was never exactly made out, but the false stock created and issued by him was estimated at two hundred twenty thousand pounds.
Even when the bubble burst Redpath, who had lived at the rate of twenty thousand a year,
had assets in the shape of land, house, furniture, pictures, and objets d'art to the value of £50,000.
He began in a very small way.
First a lawyer's clerk, he then got an appointment in the Peninsular and Oriental Company's office;
afterwards he set up as an insurance broker on his own account, but presently failed.
His fault was generosity,
an open-handed, unthinking charity which gave freely to the poor and needy the money which belonged to his creditors.
After his bankruptcy he obtained a place as clerk in the Great Northern Railway office,
from which he rose to be assistant registrar, with the special duties of transferring shares.
He soon proved his ability, and by unremitting attention mastered the whole work of the office.
Later on he became registrar, and in this more independent position
developed to a colossal extent the frauds he had already practiced as a subordinate.
Now he launched out into great expenditure, took a house in Chester Terrace, and became known as a Maecenas and patron of the arts.
He had a nice taste in bric-à-brac, and was considered a good judge of pictures.
Leading social and artistic personages were to be met with at his house, and his hospitality was far famed.
The choicest wines, the finest fruits,
peas at ten shillings a quart, five-guinea pines, and early asparagus were to be found on his table.
But his chief extravagance, his favorite folly, was the exercise of an ostentatious benevolence.
The philanthropy he had displayed in a small way when less prosperous became now a passion.
His name headed every subscription list; his purse was always open.
Not content with giving where assistance was solicited, he himself sought out deserving cases and personally afforded relief.
When the crash came there were pensioners and other recipients of his bounty who could not believe
that so good a man had really been for years a swindler and a rogue.
Down at Weybridge, where he had a country place, his name was long remembered with gratitude by the poor.
During the days of his prosperity he was a governor of Christ's Hospital,
of the St. Ann's Society, and one of the supporters and managers of the Patriotic Fund.
In his person he was neat and fastidious;
he patronized the best tailors, and had a fashionable coiffeur from Hanover Square daily to curl his hair.
There was something dramatic in Redpath's detection
Just after Robson's frauds had agitated the minds of all directors of companies, the chairman of the Great Northern (Mr. Denison)
was standing at a railway station talking to a certain well-known peer of the realm.
Redpath passed and lifted his hat to his chairman; the latter acknowledged the salute.
But the peer rushed forward and shook Redpath warmly by the hand.
"What do you know of our clerk?" asked Mr. Denison of his lordship. "Only that he is a capital fellow, who gives the best dinners and balls in town."
Redpath had industriously circulated reports that he had prospered greatly in speculation;
but the chairman of the Great Northern could not realize that a clerk of the company could honestly be in the possession of unlimited wealth.
It was at once decided at the board to make a thorough examination of all his books.
Redpath was called in and informed of the intended investigation. He tried to stave off the evil hour by declaring that everything was perfectly right;
but finding he could not escape, he said he would resign his post, and leaving the boardroom, disappeared.
The inquiry soon revealed the colossal character of the frauds.
Warrants were issued for Redpath's arrest, but he had flown to Paris.
Thither police officers followed, only to find that he had returned to London.
A further search discovered him at breakfast at a small house in the New Road.
He was arrested, examined before a police magistrate, and committed to Newgate.
Great excitement prevailed in the city and the West End when Redpath's defalcations were made public.
The Stock Market was greatly affected, and society, more especially that which frequents Exeter Hall, was convulsed.
The Central Criminal Court, when the trial came on,
was densely crowded, and many curious eyes were turned upon the somewhat remarkable man who occupied the dock.
He is described by a contemporary account as a fresh-looking man of forty years of age, slightly bald, inclined to embonpoint,
and thoroughly embodying the idea of English respectability.
His manner was generally self-possessed, but his face was marked with "uneasy earnestness,"
and he looked about him with wayward, furtive glances.
When the jury found a verdict of guilty he remained unmoved. He listened without emotion to the judge's well-merited censures,
and received his sentence of transportation for life without much surprise.
Redpath passed away into the outer darkness of a penal colony, where he was still living a year or two back
But his name lingers still in this country as that of the first swindler of his time,
and the prototype of a class not uncommon in our later days
that of dishonest rogues who assume piety and philanthropy as a cloak for their misdeeds.
In Newgate Redpath is remembered by the prison officer as a difficult man to deal with.
From the moment of his reception he gave himself great airs, as a martyr and a man heavily wronged.
By-and-by, when escape seemed hopeless, and after sentence, he suddenly degenerated into the lowest stamp of criminal,
and behaved so as to justify a belief that he had been a jail-bird all his life.
It has been already remarked in these pages that with changed social conditions came a great change in the character of crimes.
Highway robberies, for instance, had disappeared, if we except the spasmodic and severely repressed outbreak of "garotting,"
It was no longer possible to stop a coach or carriage, or rob the postman who carried the mail.
The improved methods of locomotion had put a stop to these depredations. People traveled in company, as a rule;
only when single and unprotected were they in any danger of attack, and that but rarely.
There were still big prizes, however, to tempt the daring, and none appealed more to the thievish instinct than the custom of transmitting gold by rail.
The precious metal was sent from place to place carefully locked up and guarded, no doubt;
but were the precautions too minute, the vigilance too close to be eluded or overcome?
This was the question which presented itself to the fertile brain of one Pierce,
who had been concerned in various "jobs" of a dishonest character, and who for the moment was a clerk in a betting office.
He laid the suggestion before Agar, a professional thief, who was of opinion it contained elements of success.
But the collusion and active assistance of employees of the railway carriers were indispensable, and together
they sounded one Burgess, a guard on the South-Eastern Railway, a line by which large quantities of bullion were sent to the Continent.
Burgess detailed the whole system of transmission.
The gold, packed in an iron-bound box, was securely lodged in safes locked with patent Chubbs.
Each safe had three sets of double keys, all held by confidential servants of the company.
One pair was with the traffic superintendent in London, another with an official in Folkestone,
a third with the captain of the Folkestone and Boulogne boat.
At the other side of the Channel the French railway authorities took charge.
The safes while on the line en route between London and Folkestone were in the guard's van.
This was an important step, and they might easily be robbed some day when Burgess was the guard, provided only that they could be opened.
The next step was to get impressions and fabricate false keys.
A new accomplice was now needed within the company's establishment, and Pierce looked about long before he found the right person.
At last he decided to enlist one Tester, a clerk in the traffic department, whom he thought would prove a likely tool.
The four waited patiently for their opportunity,
which came when the safes were sent to Chubbs' to be repaired; and Chubbs sent them back, but only with one key,
in such a way that Tester had possession of this key for a time.
He lent it to Agar for a brief space, who promptly took an impression on wax. But the safes had a double lock;
the difficulty was to get a copy of the second key.
This was at length effected by Agar and Pierce.
After hanging about the Folkestone office for some time, they saw at last that the key was kept in a certain cupboard.
Still watching and waiting for the first chance, they seized it when the clerks left the office empty for a moment.
Pierce boldly stepped in, found the cupboard unlocked; he removed the key, handed it to Agar outside,
who quickly took the wax impression, handed it back to Pierce; Pierce replaced it, left the office, and the thing was done.
After this nothing remained but to wait for some occasion when the amount transmitted would be sufficient to justify the risks of robbery.
It was Tester's business, 